## Introduction: Psychological Interiority versus Self-Talk

Is the self a unitary whole, or is it fractured and fragmentary? That very general, open-ended question has been a recurrent one, assuming different forms and freighted with different meanings according to the historical context. In the aftermath of the Revolution of 1789, it took on an almost startling urgency in France; the highest social and political stakes seemed to ride on it. Spanning the period 1750 to 1850, this book explores a conjuncture between psychological discourse and sociopolitical change that, I argue, captures the French in the act of grappling with the newly imposed conditions of modernity. Hence this is a book at once about the self and about sociopolitical order.

As anyone who has embarked on research of this sort knows, basic definitional considerations make the self a treacherous object of investigation. Commonplace in present-day American English, the word “self” does not send us rushing to the dictionary; we have a firm if intuitive grasp of what it signifies and how to use it. At the same time, the word, which belongs both to everyday speech and to a variety of technical languages, steadfastly resists our efforts to pin it down. Surrounding it, moreover, are a cluster of similarly vague near-synonyms—individual, person, personality, subject, subjectivity, identity—with which it seems to overlap substantially and from which it can be distinguished only with difficulty, if at all. The historical dimension of selfhood adds another layer to this definitional complexity. Historians and anthropologists long ago denaturalized the self, asserting its status as a mutable object constituted historically and culturally. The resulting scholarly literature, dating back at least as far as Jacob Burckhardt’s The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy (1860) and divided among several disciplines, has located so many putative births of the Western self—for example, with Socrates,[^1] with the Stoics,[^2] in twelfth-century religious devotion,[^3] in the Italian Renaissance[^4]—that, taken as a whole, it testifies to a widespread conceptual muddle about what, exactly, is the quarry being sought.

Rather than attempting to illuminate this muddle through a grand theoretical intervention, I have in this book adopted a minimalist position toward the self, though one, I think, that adequately serves my purposes as a historian. That position has three elements. First, I basically agree with the early twentieth-century anthropologist Marcel Mauss that “there has never existed a human being, who has not been aware not only of his body, but also at the same time of his individuality, both spiritual and physical.”[^5] Or as I would gloss and nuance Mauss’s assertion, all human beings, with the exception of infants and some psychotics, recognize, to a greater or lesser degree, the fact of individuation; if pressed, they cannot help but side with Nietzsche’s luminous Apollonians against his intoxicated Dionysians in their acceptance of the principium individuationis.[^6] Hence all human beings regard both their bodies and their minds as discrete, self-subsistent entities. It is the individuated mental stuff, as well as the individual’s own representation of it, that go under the name of self. Second, I would readily assent to the claims of Mauss, Michel Foucault, and others, that what passes for a self is not the same in all places and times. Or to return to my own vocabulary, there is no representation of the individuated mental stuff that universally obtains. Third, while I believe that the category of the self exists in some fashion in all cultures, I also believe that the cultural salience of that category—or the prevalence of what I will call self-talk—varies widely. Nor must we traverse vast temporal or geographical spaces to find noteworthy differences in salience. In fact, the story I tell in this book charts a dramatic shift in the salience of the self between the closely neighboring cultures of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century France.

Only in a culture in which self-talk is prevalent will people generally take the further step of worrying about whether the self is whole or fragmented. But that chronology may also be reversed: recognition of the pervasive existence of fragmentation coupled with a strong sense of its drawbacks may spur a rather abrupt introduction of self-talk. At least three different types of fragmentation have provided cause for worry. The type with which we are most familiar today was well evoked by Jean-Paul Sartre when he retrospectively described his first, youthful encounter with the work of Sigmund Freud, which took place in the early 1920s and resulted in a “deep repugnance”: “When you have just taken the bachot at the age of seventeen with the ‘I think, therefore I am’ of Descartes as your text and you open The Psychopathology of Everyday Life and you read the famous episode of Signorelli with its substitutions, combinations and displacements, implying that Freud was simultaneously thinking of a patient who had committed suicide and of certain Turkish mores, and so on—when you read all that, your breath is simply taken away.”[^7]

Sartre is relating the shock that he felt when, thoroughly schooled at the lycée in the belief that his individuated mental stuff took the form of a self-evident, transparent, and seamlessly whole Cartesian ego, he confronted a powerful argument for the contrary proposition that it contained vast lodes of unconsciousness, could think multiple thoughts simultaneously, and might easily elude even its own possessor. His immediate reaction was to recoil in horror. Sartre’s case is prototypical for the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, when a host of new psychological theories inspired by the empirical evidence of hypnosis—and most notable among them, Freudian psychoanalysis—argued for a fragmentation of the self along vertical, or depth-psychological, lines. According to this model, the self embraced significant expanses of deeply buried unconscious contents as well as a thin layer of readily accessible consciousness that floated atop them. I will call fragmentation of this type, premised on the existence of an unconscious mental substratum, vertical fragmentation. It figures briefly in the epilogue of this book but, as its point of historical origin alone indicates, it is not my principal concern here.

A second type of fragmentation, perhaps best labeled segmentation, refers to a disparity among the self’s various roles. Unlike vertical fragmentation, which turns on the issue of the knowability of the self, segmentation turns on the issue of its sincerity and authenticity, its being all of a piece.

That role-playing is an integral component of the Western conception of selfhood was suggested by Mauss. He regarded the originary form of the self, found alike among indigenous Australian and Northwest American tribes, to be the persona, role, or mask, a concept referring to its possessor’s social function. According to Mauss, an important evolution in this form occurred in early Roman society, which made extensive ritual use of ancestral masks. The name persona that designated the mask acquired an additional meaning; it became a technical legal term designating someone to whom the provisions of the law applied, the bearer of rights and obligations. Thus evolved, persona was for the Romans “synonymous with the true nature of the individual.”[^8] The legal persona did not give rise to concerns about fragmentation. In fact, as we will see later in this book, it seems to have functioned as the secure and stable template on which certain subsequent concepts of selfhood were drawn. But the intimate association of selfhood with something as superficial and inconstant as role-playing has at times provoked expressions of dissatisfaction and even moral outrage.

The court societies of the European monarchies of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were a locus classicus of inveterate role-playing. With brutal rivalry for the favors of the monarch as their central dynamic, they required participants to adopt public faces at odds with their private feelings. Widely circulated handbooks for courtiers even offered instruction in the art of prudential self-concealment and depicted achievement of an internal split within the person as a desirable goal. Such court-based codes of conduct, often transmitted as well to lower social strata, in turn produced a distinctive cultural backlash: criticism of the divided self and calls for the cultivation of sincere, holistic selves refusing to engage in flattery and other forms of calculated dissimulation.[^9] The great spokesman for the unified, authentic self against the habits of segmentation ingrained and valorized by the court was, of course, Jean-Jacques Rousseau. While his railing against artifice and his endorsements of a “natural” authenticity were not carried out in an explicit language of selfhood, he nonetheless engaged in self-talk rather more than did his eighteenth-century contemporaries, famously reveling in the unmistakable self (soi-même) that he encountered as the simple “feeling of existence” while drifting aimlessly on a lake in a row-boat.[^10]

The segmentation of the self through disingenuous role-playing continues to be an issue in our own day. For example, the historian George Chauncey has examined the imperative that dates from the 1970s for gay American men to “come out,” or make their sexual orientation known in public. It derived, he argues, from a strong sense, not felt by members of this group in earlier eras, of the intolerability of donning different selves in different settings.[^11] Similarly, concealment of ethnic background was once regarded as a prudential measure to facilitate getting ahead in America. But current mores placing a higher premium on authenticity now shun such segmentation of the self. Thus the celebrated architect Frank Gehry, born Frank Goldberg to Jewish working-class parents in Toronto, now bitterly regrets the new surname he adopted in Los Angeles in the 1950s. Musing about what a biography of him might someday contain, he said, “I haven’t done anything bad, except for changing my name.”[^12]

Although I frequently mention Rousseau in this book, as is almost inevitable when discussing the culture of eighteenth-century France, the segmentation of the self that obsessed Jean-Jacques is not my topic here. My chief concern is rather a third type of fragmentation of the self, which I will call horizontal fragmentation. Unlike the much better-known vertical variety, it is not defined in terms of the depth, inaccessibility, and unconsciousness of mental contents. Instead, horizontal fragmentation refers to the status of the self in those psychological theories, rooted in biology, that build up mind from an accumulation of discrete pieces and have no obvious resources for joining them together under central, unitary command. All of the pieces are, epistemologically, on the same plane; there is no variance in our ability to know them; nothing is more hidden than anything else: hence the suitability of “horizontal” to describe the axis on which they are arrayed. Still, the composite whole is decentered, giving rise to concern about whether it qualifies as a true self.

As will be discussed at length in Chapters 3 and 7, two psychological theories that had currency in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century France routinely prompted charges of endangerment of the self through horizontal fragmentation: sensationalism and phrenology. A theory of seventeenth-century English vintage, sensationalism depicted the mind at birth as a blank slate subsequently inscribed by sensory bombardment, or by the stimuli picked up by the sense organs. Conscious awareness of those inscriptions was assumed. By contrast to the dark pockets of unconsciousness that give Freudian psychoanalysis its characteristic flavor, lucid consciousness was emphatically the medium of sensationalism; John Locke’s version of the theory even helped introduce the noun “consciousness” into English.[^13] But consciousness alone does not necessarily safeguard the integrity of the self. The starkly combinatorial logic on which the sensationalist model of mind rested riled its critics. They charged that such a mind contained no force or power that could overcome its fragmentary origins and subsume countless atomistic sensations into that active, holistic entity rightfully called a self.

Phrenology met with analogous criticism. A late eighteenth-century Viennese creation, it postulated an equivalence of mind and brain, further specifying that the brain was composed of some two or three dozen (the exact number varied according to the theorist) discrete organs, each responsible for governing an intellectual ability, an emotion, or a behavioral propensity. The relative size of the organs, which could be inferred from the contours of the skull, determined the particular psychological profile of the individual. All the organs were unproblematically knowable, just as all the sensations in sensationalism were conscious. Yet, critics alleged, the divided brain that phrenologists featured as the material basis of mind provided no support for the unifying agency called the self. An organ devoted to selfhood was conspicuously absent from the roster. Nor was there any logical place for it, given the lack of functional hierarchy among the organs.

The French critics who noted and bemoaned the fragmentation of the self entailed by sensationalism and phrenology were also the group who introduced self-talk into the culture of nineteenth-century France and who lent the category of the self its particular salience in that historical context. They were Victor Cousin, at once philosopher, philosophy professor, and academic administrator, and his large and well-organized cohort of disciples. They constructed their psychology around an immaterial self, or moi, that (they insisted) was given to its possessor whole and a priori. Such a construction avoided the insidious undermining of the self that, in their opinion, resulted from hitching psychology to biology: after all, spirit, unlike matter, was not susceptible of division. Cousin’s stunning success in institutionalizing his doctrine in the national educational system vastly magnified the influence of his school. In fact, that institutionalization outlived by more than a half-century Cousin’s roughly thirty-five years of personal power (1815–51) at the lectern and in the state educational bureaucracy. In more diluted form, it even continued well into the twentieth century.

While the proponents of sensationalism, phrenology, and Cousinianism all offered versions of “the post-Revolutionary self” (to cite the title of this book), the Cousinian moi emerged as the definitive version. It did so both because its institutional success swept the field and because, alone among the three, the Cousinians engaged extensively in self-talk. They persuaded people—ordinary people as well as the guardians of the French state—that the self, meaning the unitary self, was an urgent sociopolitical necessity; and that fragmented selves, which in their view were not selves at all, wrought sociopolitical havoc. A major purpose of this book is to show how they carried out their program and to examine the broad consequences that flowed from it.

A related purpose of the book is precisely to make and to operationalize an analytic distinction between psychological discourses in general and those psychological discourses, like Cousinianism, that feature the self. The wide diffusion of sensationalism in France, I argue, produced a heightened and systematic awareness of mental interiority without thereby encouraging people to dwell upon a single tight-knit unit comprising the sum total of mental states and processes. Less widely diffused, phrenology in France opened up a psychological realm while refusing to entertain a concept of the self. Psychological interiority can, in other words, assume a pointillist attitude; it is not necessarily tantamount to self-talk.[^14] This book suggests that cultures reveal a lot about themselves by the kind of psychological discourses they adopt and, in particular, by whether or not those discourses generate self-talk.

The period 1750 to 1850, which forms the canvas of this study, has not, of course, been innocently or randomly chosen. It is the period, bridging the French Revolution, that marks the transition from the Old Regime to an ill-defined “modernity,” or from early modern Europe to modern Europe properly so called. The period, and particularly its Revolutionary pivot, have been frequently, even obsessively narrated. Historians have methodically traced its major economic changes (from guild restrictions to laissez-faire), political changes (from monarchical absolutism to national sovereignty), and social changes (from corporate organization to the career open to talents). The self has figured incidentally in these narratives. Broad-gauged assertions about the transformations it presumably underwent when everything around it was in flux have become old saws: the individual as the subject of rights was born; the era of modern bourgeois individualism was decisively inaugurated.

Without challenging the fundamental validity of such gross characterizations, this book attempts to tell a more specific, finer-grained story of what happened to selfhood when it crossed the Revolutionary divide. In order to do so, it considers sources that have not been previously marshaled for this purpose: the prevailing psychological theories of the period and their conversion into pedagogy. Viewed through this lens, a basic plotline emerges. An ascendant sensationalism reached its apogee during the Revolutionary decade and then declined. With the establishment of the July Monarchy in 1830, it yielded its place more or less conclusively to Cousinianism. Phrenology provided a contrapuntal movement. Presenting itself as an alternative to Cousinianism, it lost all the standard battles for preeminence and eventually turned its attention to the needs of socially marginal groups. For our purposes, its trajectory underscores the thoroughness of the Cousinian victory.

While I might have straightforwardly enlisted this plotline as the book’s backbone, I have instead opted for a more unusual organization, one that warrants explanation here. The book begins obliquely, in medias res. Part I is devoted to the much-vocalized anxiety about the mental faculty of imagination in eighteenth-century France (Chapter 1) and the Revolutionary effort to render imagination non-threatening and to harness it for civic ends (Chapter 2). I thus plunge the reader directly into the sensationalist-psychological discourse of this period, showing its suppleness, liveliness, and many points of contact with discourses about society, economics, and politics. At the same time as these chapters tell their respective stories and familiarize the reader with the distinctive psychological idiom of the era, they also demonstrate two points central to the argument of the book as a whole. First, far from being an arcane knowledge manipulated exclusively by philosophers, sensationalism served ordinary educated people in late eighteenth-century France as a general interpretive frame, capable of processing and decoding many kinds of information about the world. It thus set the pattern, later followed by Cousinianism and phrenology, for the broad cultural role that psychological theory played in this period.

Second, the occasion for and the incitement to the intensive development of psychological science in France in this period was provided by socioeconomic transformation. Anxiety about the workings of imagination reflected a larger anxiety about the imminent breakdown of corporate society and, after 1789, about its actual occurrence. As a careful examination of the discourse on imagination reveals, corporate structures were widely perceived in eighteenth-century France as integral to the regular and predictable functioning of persons. Thus the specter of a society without corporations effectively problematized the self for contemporaries: it posed the question of whether, in the absence of a corporate matrix, a person’s own inherent resources were adequate to ensure that person’s stability or whether, buffeted by an overactive imagination, the person would be thrown ominously off-kilter.

One logical response to this troubling question was to subject the mental workings of human beings to systematic scrutiny or, in other words, to develop a psychological science. Such a tack was very much in the spirit of the Enlightenment, which, taking Newton’s science of the natural world as a model, had mandated a search for the lawful regularities governing the human world and had vested such human sciences with a high and reassuring degree of authority.[^15] Of course, the eighteenth-century French already had such a psychological science in the form of sensationalism. Its initial articulation in seventeenth-century England may well have been prompted by the precocious appearance of a laissez-faire economy there, just as its gallicization by the abbé de Condillac in the 1740s was probably spurred on by intimations of corporate collapse. Hence, French attempts to tame the imagination and stabilize the freestanding individual, which occurred especially during the Revolution, took the form not of creating a psychological science from scratch but of more thoroughly and deliberately exploiting the one at hand, newly construing it as a resource in sociopolitical affairs. Whether or not the Revolutionaries’ experiment in using psychology as an instrument of government succeeded (the question was made moot by the Napoleonic coup and the demise of the regime as a whole), its lesson was not lost on their early nineteenth-century successors. The post-Revolutionary generation faced sociopolitical problems of their own and had, moreover, in the form of Cousinianism and phrenology, brand-new psychological sciences to press into service.

Strictly speaking, the late eighteenth-century recognition of the perils of the imagination qualifies as a problematization of the self. For, to use the vocabulary I have introduced here, observers were expressing a concern about the capacities of the individuated mental stuff. Yet, significantly for our purposes, that problem was not cast as self-talk. It was not the “self” that seemed deficient or defective to pre-Revolutionary observers who apprehensively noted the high incidence of wayward imagination; to their way of thinking, the defect was narrowly lodged in the mental faculty of imagination per se and was then prone to exacerbation by certain social environments that dangerously overstimulated it. Likewise, in coping with the problem of wayward imagination, the Revolutionaries did not speak of stabilizing the self; they instead devised strategies targeting the single mental faculty in question. In fact, their ability to lavish so much exclusive attention on one element of the psyche confirms the characterization of sensationalism as producing psychic fragmentation. It also shows that a theory can foster psychological interiority while remaining aloof from self-talk. Hence, while Part I establishes many of the essential motifs of the book, especially the currency of psychological discourse in ordinary life, what is conspicuously absent from it is a culturally salient category of the self. Serious self-talk enters the book only in Part II.

That is why Chapter 3, which opens Part II, backtracks both chronologically and substantively. It treats from the angle of the self the sensationalist theory that, from other angles, already figured so prominently in Part I. It looks at what the key texts of sensationalism had to say about the self, starting with the seminal analysis in the second edition of John Locke’s Essay on Human Understanding (1694). It shows that, in some quarters, expressions of concern and disapprobation about the flimsiness and fragmentation of the sensationalist self dated back as far as Locke’s weighing in on the matter. But it also shows that a strong, unitary self was not a requirement for everyone: the chief French exponent of sensationalism, the abbé de Condillac, endorsed without apology the flimsy self that he derived from his own version of Locke’s principles. The very minor place consequently occupied by the self in Condillac’s psychological treatises coincides with and helps to explain the absence of self-talk even among psychologically attuned people in late eighteenth-century and Revolutionary France. Such people had, after all, basically learned their psychology from Condillac. Despite their marked tendency to understand the world in psychological terms, an entity called the self was absent from their preoccupations.

What vaulted self-talk into prominence early in the nineteenth century was, I argue, the rupture represented by the Revolution and the concerns unleashed first by the excesses of the Terror and then by the collapse of the moderate republican regime that attempted to undo those excesses. As observers sought to understand the agony of the French nation and to pin the blame for it on some plausible culprit, a group of thinkers, later to become influential, lighted upon the demoralizing effects of the long eighteenth-century reign of sensationalism and especially the pallid and passive self associated with it. Political stability, they contended, required a different psychology, which would in turn undergird—and create—a different kind of self.

The moi that the Cousinians made iconic was deliberately the anti-type of its sensationalist counterpart: a robust, active, unshakably unitary self instead of a flimsy, fragmented one. The Cousinians not only taught this self as a doctrine. Their national educational program, which more or less persisted through the nineteenth century, routinized practices of introspection designed to ensure that students would directly perceive the activity of the self within them. The formidable cultural work performed by the Cousinian moi ranged even farther than this literal training in selfhood and inculcation of a newly lively belief in personal agency; it touched on the very organization of society. Because Cousin’s philosophy specified that only certain people had the intellectual gifts necessary to actualize the moi that everyone possessed potentially, it established a hierarchy between the selved and the unselved. Based on class and gender, that hierarchy was then replicated and reinforced institutionally in the populations that were included in or, alternately, excluded from schooling in philosophical psychology. Through this combination of granting the self extraordinary cultural salience and providing a new criterion for ranking people, Cousinianism did nothing less than supply a structuring principle for the society—I will call it bourgeois society—that came into its own after the Revolution. The Cousinian moi effectively supplanted the structuring principle of Old Regime society: the corporate order that the Revolution had abolished.

I speak of “bourgeois society” advisedly. I am not using the term in a strict Marxian sense to refer to a society founded on industrial capitalism (which, economic historians have shown, had little purchase in France before 1850 in any case) or run by captains of industry. I use it more loosely to refer to that inherently fluid, individualistic social order that came into being in France once the corporations had been outlawed and laissez-faire economic principles gave free rein to individual professional ambition. This society was bourgeois in the sense that its characteristic elite was non-noble and readied for leadership by education rather than birth. The place of education is key. The post-Revolutionary French state demonstrated a marked zeal for the creation of central educational institutions—most famously, the lycées, founded in 1802—designed to train civil servants for the state administration. In all likelihood, its intense commitment to education grew out of its earlier destruction of the corporations. As Pierre Rosanvallon has argued, providing schools was one of several aspects of the singular function of “producing society” that the nineteenth-century French state took upon itself in order to compensate for its excision of the corporate bodies and for the brutally torn social fabric that resulted.[^16]

I would be inclined to identify this state-educated elite as the most characteristic component of the nineteenth-century French bourgeoisie.[^17] As befits the new structuring principle of French society that succeeded the corporations, then, the Cousinian moi was thoroughly embedded in the state education system, even using the lycées as its instrument of dissemination. In calling this self “bourgeois,” I am not, it should be evident, conceptualizing Cousinian psychology as the ideological reflex of an already objectively existent bourgeois class. Rather I am suggesting that Cousinian psychology participated actively in the constitution of this social group, furnishing its members with a shared, highly articulated subjectivity or self-conception and providing them with a psychological justification for their social superiority.

In invoking the adjective “bourgeois” for the Cousinian self, I am not only utilizing the word’s neutral, taxonomical sense—that is, its reference to the social elite that supplanted the nobility—but also exploiting some of the more colorful, barbed connotations that the word acquired during its long history in France. As Chapter 4 will show, specific attributes of the Cousinian moi make it a perfect epitome of colloquial bourgeois-ness: Cousinian psychology valorized in technical language both the positive self-image of this new French elite and its negative image in widespread antibourgeois satire. Thus the Cousinian moi was defined as a dynamic will capable of molding the world and as a foundational principle that endowed private property with metaphysical status. But at the same time that moi necessarily affirmed a set of values that, though lavishly praised by Cousin, destined it for all the unoriginality and conformism of Flaubert’s Monsieur Homais.

### Influences, Interlocutors

In trying to think about the self in terms simultaneously historical and theoretical, I turned to Michel Foucault as one of the few available guides. Hence it is fair to say that this book is in some ways Foucauldian in inspiration. One of Foucault’s great theoretical contributions was to account for the new forms of individuality and subjectivity characteristic of the modern West by showing how they were, surprisingly, completely embedded in the new modalities of power that he called discipline and biopower.[^18] As he extended the investigations begun in Discipline and Punish and the first volume of The History of Sexuality back into classical antiquity, Foucault built on this insight by formulating, with his usual keen sense of paradox, the category of a “technology of the self.” It posits very concrete practices that a society recommends or prescribes to shape that intangible, even ethereal thing called a self.[^19] My own study takes from Foucault the impulse to integrate historical variations in the self into a kind of histoire totale that includes social, political, and economic elements; and it shares Foucault’s “technological” fascination by focusing on educational institutions and pedagogical methods as instruments of self-making. It moreover identifies the Cousinianism taught in the nineteenth-century French lycée as a superlatively influential technology of the self.

In another of its presuppositions, too, this study concurs with Foucault. While an investigation of the self in this period might have relied primarily on the looser and more intimate discursive forms of the novel, letter, and diary, this one, while not neglecting such sources, focuses on the psychological sciences—that is, the theories of the mind that claimed scientific status. It takes that approach out of a belief that in the modern period the psychological sciences have wielded a special authority and rhetorical power over the literate public. Ordinary educated people have readily, if informally, adopted their schemas as interpretive frames to make sense of their own mental experience and of the inner lives of others. I see sensationalism, Cousinianism, and phrenology as functioning in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century France much as Freudianism functioned in the twentieth-century United States. Freudian concepts became part of the mental furniture of the average educated American. One did not need to be a card-carrying adept of psychoanalysis to lend credence to such ideas as infantile sexuality, Oedipal rivalry, and Freudian slips, and to use them in navigating the everyday world.

The central place of the human sciences and of the standard of scientific truth applied to human affairs was, of course, a leitmotif of Foucault’s analysis of the modern West, one that figured in almost all his major works. In a metahistory of the self that he sketched out for an interviewer in the 1980s, too, Foucault identified the advent of scientific knowledge as the turning point. He distinguished between the “self,” which had in his view existed at least since classical antiquity, and the “subject,” a distinctly modern invention. The self, fundamentally ethical and aesthetic in nature, was capable of obtaining truth only if well cared for by its owner. The subject, introduced by Descartes, could obtain truth simply by seeing what was evident; it was thus the functional equivalent of all other subjects. With the mid-seventeenth-century arrival of the subject, in other words, evidence supplanted the vagaries of “care of the self” as the road to truth, and the enterprise of modern science was made possible.[^20] Although I have not adopted Foucault’s terminology of “self” versus “subject” in this book, I share his conviction that something fundamentally new and highly significant happened to the self historically when the language of science was applied to it.

But while Foucault’s writings have been a frequent reference point in my thinking about this topic, I have never regarded his conclusions as dicta. I have used them heuristically, keeping them at the ready and drawing on them, where relevant, to interpret and organize the material that I turned up in libraries and archives. A strictly Foucauldian approach to selfhood would have ignored Cousin. After all, probably as a result of his desire to debunk the academic philosophy that had loomed so large over his own education, Foucault specifically excluded “philosophical theories of the mind, passions, or body” from the materials he regarded as pertinent to the constitution of the self.[^21] It would, on those same grounds, have ignored sensationalism and probably phrenology as well. Foucault seems to have overlooked the fact that all three of these “philosophical theories of the mind” generated a widely deployed practical pedagogy and were thus, by his own criteria, entirely plausible participants in the project of constituting the self. Finally, a strictly Foucauldian approach to nineteenth-century selfhood would certainly not have countenanced the virtual silence about sexuality that the reader will find in these pages. In considering the construction of modern subjectivity, Foucault accorded a uniquely privileged status to the personal information about sexual desires, fantasies, and conduct extracted during asymmetrical, face-to-face encounters with scientific experts—a hypothesis that I have simply bracketed here.

In another important way, too, this study diverges from the conventions of Foucault’s history writing. While his genealogies of the modern self concerned issues of power and were, in a very general sense, historically situated, they also lacked intentional actors and displayed structural dynamics of their own that set them apart from familiar historical narratives. The story of the post-Revolutionary self that I tell here is, by contrast, much more specifically grounded in a recognizable historical landscape. It includes consequential and willful actors, especially Victor Cousin and his chief ally, François Guizot. Its plotline features political calculations and strategies and is mindful of the bevy of distinct political regimes that characterize French history after 1789. In sum, while sympathetic to Foucault’s perspectives, I have tended to see the blatantly public field of national politics, and not only the hidden recesses of insidious systems of micro-power, as the site of the constitution of the self. Mentioning “politics” (meaning national politics) in the subtitle of this book thus marks my distance from Foucault.[^22]

Another recent commentator on the history of the self, the philosopher Charles Taylor, has had less impact on this study; indeed, it is my differences with Taylor, rather than my borrowings from him, that deserve mention here. Those differences focus on the way each of us has conceptualized the relationship between Descartes and Locke.

What I have called the horizontal fragmentation of the self occurred in early modern Europe when Descartes’ picture of the human mind—an immaterial, indivisible, and ever-present thinking substance—gave way to the additive, biologically based Lockean picture. Hence, in its a priori holism, the Cousinian moi restored essential features of its Cartesian predecessor. Cousin acknowledged this debt to the founder of modern philosophy early in his career and then symbolically discharged it in the 1820s by preparing a new, eleven-volume edition of Descartes’ collected works.[^23] Similarly, the Cartesianism avowed by Sartre in the passage quoted earlier derived from his training in a lycée system still using, after almost a century, a version of the pro-Cartesian philosophy curriculum installed by Cousin in the 1830s. The story I tell here, in other words, turns on the distinction between Descartes and Locke and on the possibilities for the fragmentation of the self introduced by closely linking mind and matter.

In his Sources of the Self, whose canvas covers the more than two millennia from Plato through Derrida, Taylor makes no such distinction. He depicts the modern Western self as triply characterized by an inwardness, or sense of having inner depths, that began its career with Augustine; by an affirmation of the ordinary life of work and family as the arena for the realization of selfhood, a development that awaited the Protestant Reformation; and by a late eighteenth-century Romantic-inspired belief in the voice of nature as expressive of the authentic self. In this account, Descartes and Locke appear under the first rubric, inwardness. After Augustine accomplished the momentous feat of introducing radical reflexivity into the Western tradition by building an entire system of thought around the assertion that God was to be found inside our minds rather than outside in the world,[^24] Descartes and Locke made the next significant contributions to Western inwardness. At more than a thousand years’ remove from Augustine but a mere fifty years’ remove from each other, they participated in a common project that Taylor calls disengagement. Following Augustine in finding more intrinsic interest in the mental processing apparatus than in the things “out there” that are processed, they inflected this Augustinian preference. They refused to inhabit Augustine’s first-person standpoint or to immerse themselves in the “bewitchment” of experience. Instead, each chose to objectify the mental apparatus, thus acquiring a measure of control over it and depriving the experience it offered of normative force.[^25] In Taylor’s long view, Descartes and Locke appear more similar than dissimilar.

That Taylor has presented a striking narrative must be granted. But the very broad sweep of that narrative almost ensures the existence of valid subnarratives that fall within its chronological scope and go against its grain. One such subnarrative, completely effaced by Taylor but well documented in this book, is the concern about a specific quality of psychological inwardness: whether the inner space that is inhabited enjoys a structural unity that can ground a reliably coherent self or is so fragmented and diffuse as to preclude that outcome. While this concern, surfacing in the wake of Locke’s Essay and marking the sharp divergence of sensationalism from Cartesianism, appears only as a wrinkle in the millennial trend that Taylor discerned, it was an event of no small magnitude at the level of a hundred-year durée. It obsessed many educated Frenchmen during the late eighteenth and the nineteenth centuries. It points, at least in France, to a massive change in the place of the self in the social imaginary. As such it will carry a driving force in this story.

The psychically fragmenting effects of sensationalism, as actually experienced by many educated post-Revolutionary Frenchmen, indicate a final intellectual context in which this book should be situated. Postmodern theorists of a Derridean stripe have typically portrayed the Western subject as monolithically logocentric—that is, as a unified “presence” serving a foundational function—all the way from Plato to Derrida.[^26] According to their account, the possibility that this reassuringly stable entity might be illusory dawned on Western thinkers only in the late twentieth century. The account of the Cousinian project that I offer in this book casts doubt on this postmodern tenet. It shows that anxious awareness of the potential disintegration of the subject was a central fact of early nineteenth-century French intellectual life and describes deliberate political efforts to ward off that eventuality as early as the 1830s. It suggests that the conceptions of selfhood embedded in Western philosophy are considerably more variegated than the postmodernists allow. It furthermore suggests that postmodernism may have mistakenly assigned transhistorical status to a version of the self that is in fact quite historically specific. Its real nemesis may be the resolutely armored moi of Victor Cousin and his school, which—as this book will demonstrate at length—was summoned into existence in the name of post-Revolutionary bourgeois order and was destined for a surprisingly long reign.

### NOTES

[^1]: 1. The idea that Greeks of the Homeric age had no coherent concept of the self was famously argued by Bruno Snell, The Discovery of Mind in Greek Philosophy and Literature (2d German ed. 1948), trans. T. G. Rosenmeyer (New York: Dover, 1982), chap. 1, and later developed by A. W. H. Adkins, Merit and Responsibility: A Study in Greek Values (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1960) and From the Many to the One: A Study of Personality and Views of Human Nature in the Context of Ancient Greek Society, Values and Beliefs (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1970). Adkins also used the term “shame culture,” meaning a culture whose ultimate sanction is overtly “what people will say,” to refer to pre-Socratic Greece. Insofar as shame culture is seen as precluding moral autonomy, Socrates’ principled adherence to a moral code at odds with the socially accepted one in classical Athens has been viewed as the historical birth of conscience and therefore personhood.

[^2]: 2. The Stoic practice of askesis, sometimes translated as “care of the self,” has recently attracted attention, leading some commentators to locate the birth of a certain kind of self in Stoicism; see, for example, Pierre Hadot, Philosophy as a Way of Life: Spiritual Exercises from Socrates to Foucault (1st French ed. 1981), trans. Michael Chase (Oxford: Blackwell, 1995), and Michel Foucault, The Care of the Self, vol. 3 of The History of Sexuality (French ed. 1984), trans. Robert Hurley (New York: Vintage, 1990). As Charles Taylor notes, the Stoic injunction to take care of oneself “calls us to a reflexive stance” and is, he implies, the historically first philosophical system to do so; see his Sources of the Self: The Making of the Modern Identity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989), p. 130.

[^3]: 3. See, e.g., Colin Morris, The Discovery of the Individual, 1050–1200 (1972; repr. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1987) and Caroline Walker Bynum, “Did the Twelfth Century Discover the Individual?” in Jesus as Mother: Studies in the Spirituality of the High Middle Ages (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982), 82–109. For a novel approach to the same thesis that focuses not on religious practice but on the use of seals, see Brigitte Miriam Bedos-Rezak, “Medieval Identity: A Sign and a Concept,” American Historical Review 105 (2000): 1489–1533.

[^4]: 4. This was the position put forth in Jacob Burckhardt’s Die Cultur der Renaissance in Italien: Ein Versuch (Basel, 1860); for a recent revision of the position, see John Martin, “Inventing Sincerity, Refashioning Prudence: The Discovery of the Individual in Renaissance Europe,” American Historical Review 102 (1997): 1309–1342.

[^5]: 5. Marcel Mauss, “A Category of the Human Mind: The Notion of the Person; the Notion of the Self” (1938), trans. W. D. Halls, in The Category of the Person: Anthropology, Philosophy, History, ed. Michael Carrithers, Steven Collins, and Steven Lukes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), 1–25, quotation on p. 3. Another version of this claim comes from Clifford Geertz, “‘From the Native’s Point of View’: On the Nature of Anthropological Understanding,” in Local Knowledge: Further Essays in Interpretive Anthropology (New York: Basic Books, 1983), p. 59: “some sort of concept [of person], one feels reasonably safe in saying, exists in recognizable form in all social groups.”

[^6]: 6. The reference is to Friedrich Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy, trans. Walter Kaufmann (New York: Random House, 1967), e.g., pp. 35–36, 39–40. (I have preserved Nietzsche’s use of the Latin principium individuationis because, as discussed in Chapter 3, below, Locke used it as well.) Even the belief systems, such as Buddhism, that call the self into question assume its existence. See, e.g., Bernard Faure, The Red Thread: Buddhist Approaches to Sexuality (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998), pp. 31–32: “In spite of the dogma of no-self, Buddhist ascetics, like Indian yogis and Greek Stoics, seem to have conceived the self as a citadel besieged by the external world.”

[^7]: 7. Jean-Paul Sartre, “An Interview,” New York Review of Books, 26 May 1970, p. 23.

[^8]: 8. Mauss, “Category,” pp. 4–17, quotation on 17.

[^9]: 9. See, e.g., Norbert Elias, The Civilizing Process (1st German ed. 1939, 1st English ed. 1982) and, for a focus on the psychological dynamics of Louis XIV’s court at Versailles and their later impact on non-elite groups, Roger Chartier, “Trajectoires et tensions culturelles de l’Ancien Régime,” in Histoire de la France, ed. André Burguière and Jacques Revel, 4 vols. (Paris: Seuil, 1989–93), 4: 307–92, esp. 315–32. A similar argument is made for Renaissance monarchies in Martin, “Inventing Sincerity,” p. 1322.

[^10]: 10. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Les Rêveries du promeneur solitaire in Oeuvres complètes, ed. Bernard Gagnebin and Marcel Raymond, 4 vols. (Paris: Gallimard/Pléiade, 1959–69), 1: 1047.

[^11]: 11. See George Chauncey, “Après Stonewall, le déplacement de la frontière entre le ‘soi’ public et le ‘soi’ privé,” Histoire et sociétés: Revue européenne d’histoire sociale 3 (2002): 45–59. I am following Chauncey’s use of the term “segmentation” here.

[^12]: 12. Quoted in Martin Filler, “Ghosts in the House,” New York Review of Books, 21 October 1999, pp. 10–15, quotation on p. 10.

[^13]: 13. See Charles Landesman, Jr., “Consciousness,” in The Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. Paul Edwards, 8 vols. (New York: Macmillan and Free Press, 1967), 2: 191–95, esp. 192, and Eric Lormand, “Consciousness,” in Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. Edward Craig, 10 vols. (London: Routledge, 1998), 2: 581–96, esp. 590.

[^14]: 14. This analytic distinction is much in the spirit of the model of the self that William M. Reddy has proposed in The Navigation of Feeling: A Framework for the History of the Emotions (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001). Not unlike the deemphasized self of the sensationalists, Reddy’s “disaggregated self” (p. 95), always faced by an excess of activations requiring translation, lacks inherent unity and can achieve only a provisional integration.

[^15]: 15. This is one of the central arguments of Keith Michael Baker, Condorcet: From Natural Philosophy to Social Mathematics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976).

[^16]: 16. Pierre Rosanvallon, L’état en France de 1789 à nos jours (Paris: Seuil, 1990), pp. 95–99, 108–10. Rosanvallon calls the state in this capacity the “instituteur du social,” the title he gives to Part 2 of the book.

[^17]: 17. In this respect, my argument is not dissimilar from that of Sarah Maza, The Myth of the French Bourgeoisie: An Essay on the Social Imaginary, 1750–1850 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003), pp. 129–30, 196–97, despite Maza’s provocative assertion of the nonexistence of the French bourgeoisie and her call to historians to proscribe the term.

[^18]: 18. See my summary of his arguments in Jan Goldstein, “Foucault and the Post-Revolutionary Self: The Uses of Cousinian Pedagogy in Nineteenth-Century France” in Foucault and the Writing of History, ed. Jan Goldstein, (Oxford: Blackwell, 1994), 99–115, esp. 108–11.

[^19]: 19. For his definition of a “technology of the self,” see his obligatory summary of his course at the Collège de France in the academic year 1980–81 reprinted in Michel Foucault, Résumé des cours, 1970–1982 (Paris: Julliard, 1989), esp. pp. 133–34.

[^20]: 20. See Foucault, “On the Genealogy of Ethics: An Overview of Work in Progress,” in The Foucault Reader, ed. Paul Rabinow, (New York: Pantheon, 1984), pp. 340–72, esp. 371–72.

[^21]: 21. I earlier noted and attempted to explain this discrepancy between Foucault’s dictum and my findings; see Goldstein, “Foucault and the Post-Revolutionary Self,” esp. pp. 111–15.

[^22]: 22. On Foucault’s lack of interest in the events of political history, see Keith Michael Baker, “A Foucauldian French Revolution?” in Foucault and the Writing of History, ed. Goldstein, pp. 187–205, esp. 187–89. On “micro-power,” see Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: Pantheon, 1977), e.g., p. 222.

[^23]: 23. See François Azouvi, Descartes et la France: Histoire d’une passion nationale (Paris: Fayard, 2002), pp. 168–82, esp. 170–71.

[^24]: 24. Taylor, Sources of the Self, esp. p. 131.

[^25]: 25. Ibid., chaps. 8 and 9, esp. 163, for “bewitchment.” Taylor does not, of course, contend that Descartes and Locke arrived at the same objectified mental apparatuses.

[^26]: 26. The locus classicus of this argument is, of course, Jacques Derrida, Of Grammatology (1st French ed., 1967), trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976), esp. pt. 1, chaps. 1–2.
