## 1 The Perils of Imagination at the End of the Old Regime

Each artisan will regard himself as a solitary being, dependent on himself alone, and free to indulge all the flights of an often disordered imagination.

Remonstrance of the Parlement of Paris against the edict abolishing the guilds, 1776

Among the many tensions that erupted in Paris in the critical year 1789, a relatively petty one can serve as a convenient frame for this chapter. At the beginning of January, and against the background of the elections for the Estates-General, a comedy by Philippe Fabre d’Eglantine entitled Le Présomptueux, ou l’heureux imaginaire opened at the Théâtre Français only to be hooted off the stage during the second scene. Disgruntled members of the audience alleged that the play “treated the same subject” as another play soon to be presented but written by a different dramatist.[^1] In fact, the two works in question—the second was Les Châteaux en Espagne by Jean-François Collin d’Harleville—did, as their titles suggest, converge on a single theme: the impact on human affairs of an especially active imagination. (Building “castles in Spain” had the same colloquial and figurative meaning then as now. The abbé de Condillac wrote in his Essai sur les origines des connaissances humaines [1746] that all human beings tended in moments of idleness to spin daydreams in which they cast themselves as heroes and that these “castles in Spain” remained harmless products of the imagination as long as their creators faithfully distinguished them from external reality.)[^2] The audience protest on the evening of January 7, 1789, crystallized a long-standing literary rivalry. When Fabre d’Eglantine charged that the protesters who had rudely brought down his play with their allegations of plagiarism were members of a “powerful cabal” devoted to Collin d’Harleville, he may have exaggerated the depths of the intrigue involved, but he seems to have correctly grasped the gist of the story.[^3]

How should we interpret this squabble? And how—if at all—should we decipher its relation to the troubled political environment that would, in less than half a year, issue in the collapse of the Old Regime? One tack might be to highlight the mood of the theater-going public: the certain low boiling point that prevented the audience from sitting through the whole of Fabre’s new play was perhaps symptomatic of a more generalized spirit of agitation or even, as one nineteenth-century commentator has suggested, of mutiny.[^4] Another strategy might be to emphasize the fact that Fabre would soon emerge as a revolutionary politician. His pugnacious temperament (he affiliated with Marat and Danton at the Cordeliers Club) was better suited for the new rough-and-tumble world of popular participation than was Collin’s gentility, and hence it was no accident that the earlier maligned Présomptueux was finally performed in its entirety—and to wide acclaim—in February 1790, when the Revolution was in full swing.[^5]

But whatever merit these hypotheses might possess, they are not my interest here. What interests me about the controversy is rather the similar content of the two plays involved—that is, their exploration of the workings of imagination in ordinary life—and the relationship of that content to the historical rupture brought about by the Revolution. Briefly put, my thesis has two parts. First, the changes associated with the Revolution and already adumbrated during the closing decades of the Old Regime problematized for contemporaries the nature of the human person, or self—or, more accurately, triggered one of those reproblematizations of the self that punctuate the history of the West. Second, according to the eighteenth-century understanding of psychology, the imagination was the most vulnerable component of the person, the one that would unfailingly wreak havoc (on its owner and on others) if certain kinds of alterations in the social fabric were undertaken. However else the quarrel between Fabre and Collin might be read as a presage of the Revolution, the fascination of two prominent playwrights with the imagination at this particular historical juncture and their conviction that the public would share that fascination was, I contend, a discursive marker of sociocultural unease and of the seismic shifts that were soon to come.

Before explaining these assertions in detail, let me return to the Fabre-Collin affaire. A closer look at the documentation it generated as well as at the plays themselves will, while not proving my assertions, at least clarify them and render them more plausible.

Five days after the abortive premiere of Le Présomptueux, Fabre d’Eglantine published an open letter responding to the implicit accusation of plagiarism.[^6] The text of this letter in effect doubles back on itself: it not only discusses imagination directly as a possible subject for a theatrical composition but also discusses it indirectly when offering an account of the creative process designed to exonerate Fabre from blame. This curious doubling back has the result—significant for us here—of underscoring Fabre’s intense preoccupation with the category of imagination.

Fabre begins his letter by reconstructing the sequence of events by which he first learned that Collin was writing a play about imagination. He had encountered his rival at the theater when, at the conclusion of the evening’s performance, both men paid a visit to a certain actress in her box. There the conversation turned to the difficulty of finding subjects suitable for comedy. After Fabre volunteered the four such subjects that seemed to him most obvious (natural man, ambition in the village, private life, and the hypocrisy of society), Collin ticked off his own list of three: the bachelor, the efforts of fathers to instruct their children, and, offered after a somewhat anxious pause, one that he found “especially droll” and about which he was currently writing—“castles in Spain.” Upon hearing this third and final subject, Fabre’s ears pricked up. He sensed that Collin was emitting important cues about the level of his artistic investment in this theme, and he describes his own mental response very explicitly, using the language of sensationalist psychology current in educated circles in France at that date. “The simultaneously impatient and circumspect demeanor of Monsieur Collin,” he reports, “caught my attention”—attention was one of the key mental operations in Condillac’s psychology—“and I confess that upon hearing that word [castles in Spain] I experienced the bedazzlement that an onrush of ideas produces.”

In the midst of all this mental excitement, Fabre remained silent, keeping his counsel while his companions in the box continued to chat. When the conversation concluded (all told, it had lasted less than a half-hour), he and Collin walked together as far as the Rue Dauphine, during which time his rival asked him to elaborate on one of Fabre’s own preferred subjects for comedy: private life. “Not a word, not a word,” Fabre insists, was said about castles in Spain during this stroll. Nonetheless, the earlier, chance mention of a play about imagination had stayed with Fabre, activating his own imagination: “My imagination was struck (frappée) by it, though without determinate plan.” The next night he happened to choose for his bedtime reading Montaigne’s “On Idleness,” in which the essayist warns that a mind left unoccupied casts itself about in “disordered” fashion “in the vague field of imagination.” Indeed, Montaigne confesses that he had believed when he retired to his estate that he would do himself a great favor by leaving his mind idle, only to find that his mind then chose its own work and, to his shame, “gave birth to an array of chimeras and fantastic monsters.”[^7] Thus, accidentally coming upon some of Montaigne’s ruminations on imagination, Fabre “felt myself very keenly struck (frappé), for the second time, with the idea of castles in Spain.” Ever alert to the nuances of his mental processes, he goes on to specify that this second coup was “absolutely different” from the one that had occurred in the theatre the night before. On that earlier occasion the ideas he generated had been—again the language of sensationalist psychology—“mechanically combined.” This time, he “conceived of” a comedy on the theme in question “with such rapidity” and, apparently, with such holistic integrity that he “immediately got up” and wrote the entire first scene during the course of the night. A mere seventeen days sufficed for him to finish off the full five acts.

Fabre’s pamphlet thus begins with an anatomization of the process of his own literary imagination: he describes the entirely automatic and thus implicitly blameless manner in which external stimuli had spurred it on to action, without the intervention of a malicious will to encroach on Collin’s turf. In the mechanisms of psychology, he thus finds his first line of defense against the charge of plagiarism. Fabre then turns to imagination as a kind of topos, a subject matter for the genre of comedy. And here, too, analyzing imagination from a different psychological vantage point, he finds a second line of defense. He stole nothing from Collin because “this subject is inexhaustible; this disorder of mind is not [embodied in] a single character but is rather a modification belonging to all possible characters.” To be convinced of the myriad forms that imagination can assume, the limitless number of plotlines that reverie can produce, “one need only look closely at oneself.” Far from being unethical or narrowly self-serving, then, Fabre’s variation on the theme of imagination that had first been chosen by Collin for representation on stage was, in fact, an artistic accomplishment from which all his colleagues could benefit, “a means,” in Fabre’s own words, “of expanding the resources of comedy.”

Fabre thus offered up his reflections on the processes and nature of imagination in a bid to clear himself of charges of wrongdoing. But what, in particular, had attracted him and Collin to imagination as a subject for a theatrical composition at the end of the eighteenth century? To answer that question requires that we examine the plays themselves.

They are, in their basic contours, remarkably similar. In each, a young well-born man essentially defined by his overly active imagination believes that he can successfully woo the young well-born lady of the house; in the end, he fails. Yet, despite these fully comparable plotlines, Fabre argued in his open letter for the “inexhaustible” scope of the imagination theme by pointing out that he and his rival had given it fundamentally different comedic interpretations:

> His [Collin’s] visionary daydreams for the sake of daydreaming. Mine daydreams because he is presumptuous, and if one studies nature carefully, one will see that presumptuousness is the most abundant—and the most dangerous—source of chimeras in the human mind.[^8]

The contrast Fabre drew between the two main characters is apt, as is his intimation that, in terms of tone, his own play had the sharper edge. Set in an isolated chateau surrounded by forest, Collin’s Châteaux en Espagne created a misty atmosphere of semi-reality that seems to encourage all the characters to give free rein to their imaginations.[^9] The chief offender, d’Orlange, effortlessly wins the young lady’s father, Monsieur d’Orfeuil, over to his cause. But the young lady, Henriette—who is chided by her maidservant at the opening of the play for her own dreamy tendency to imagine as her future husband a perfect man who could exist in a novel but not in reality[^10]—dislikes d’Orlange because his head is in the clouds. (She judges him, she says, by his words, which are “empty, light, inconsequential, frivolous,” indicating that he would make “an extremely pleasant lover, and a very bad spouse” [Act 2, Scene 5, p. 279].) Realizing that Henriette loves another man, however, d’Orlange cannot ultimately bring himself to capitalize on the paternal consent to his own match, and he goes in search of Henriette’s beloved Florville, expeditiously returning him to the chateau. This good deed—and the almost palpable happiness and gratitude it generates in his entourage—apparently cures d’Orlange of his earlier need to take refuge in imagination:

> Me! I did my duty. Ah! let us draw a deep breath . . .
> We can feel how much a good deed refreshes the blood:
> And this kind of good is not imaginary;
> Henceforth I thoroughly renounce what are called “chimeras.”
> It’s done. I am forever corrected. (Act 5, Scene 10, p. 345)

The play thus ending with d’Orlange’s “correction” ends on a gentle note of reconciliation and harmony. Having assimilated himself to the prevailing code of conduct, d’Orlange vows to buy a piece of land in the canton (M. d’Orfeuil volunteers his help in locating the real estate) and to settle down on it with a still-to-be-chosen wife. The “castles in Spain” have thus been officially banished (as his valet declares in the play’s very last line),[^11] but d’Orlange himself will be allowed to stay.

Fabre’s play, by contrast, ends on a vindictive note. The d’Orlange equivalent, Valère, is rejected in his suit and, swearing that the young lady in question, Lucille, has “lost more than [she] knows,” he departs the Franval estate “without pique but”—his imaginary world still intact—“not without hope.” Unlike M. d’Orfeuil, who welcomes the transformed d’Orlange into the fold, M. de Franval bids the incorrigible Valère good riddance and ends the play by nearly cursing him and his particular mental state:

> Astonishing. . . . And, what’s more, he believes what he says.
> Let us nonetheless conclude that the presumptuous person
> Is mad (fou) in his desires and is never happy. (Act 5, Scene 7, p. 133)[^12]

What does “presumptuous” imagination and the fond attachment to castles in Spain connote in these two plays, and why is it so threatening in both—needing to be reformed and neutralized in Collin’s version and altogether extirpated in Fabre’s? For both playwrights (and despite the fact that neither of these plays concerns social climbing per se), the dominance of imagination in an individual psyche is explicitly associated with that individual’s lack of fixed social position, with a kind of social floating that flaunts the requirements of order. D’Orlange’s valet makes this association in the strongest possible terms by metaphorically likening his master to that most deracinated of Old Regime figures, the Jew. D’Orlange is, he declares, “a true wandering Jew, always roaming the world” (Act 2, Scene 1, p. 261). Soon after, d’Orlange confirms this description, acknowledging that he frequently, indeed purposely, goes astray, “know[ing] neither the roads nor the map” (Act 2, Scene 3, p. 265).

D’Orlange’s propensity for geographical wandering has its mental analogue in his similarly unbounded and uncharted flights of imagination, one of which forms the centerpiece of the play (Act 3, Scenes 6–7). Optimistic about his pursuit of Henriette, he sees his presumed success in the marital arena as a sign of even bigger things to come: “I can make a name for myself and, in my Ministry, serve the King, the State, pacify the earth. . . .” He warms to his theme, “arriving by degrees”—as the stage directions specify—“at a kind of reverie and vision.” A ship he has boarded in his official capacity is attacked by the Turks, whom he proceeds to fight almost single-handedly; and when he is finally forced to surrender, his assailants, “charmed by my valor, proclaim me their leader.” His bold exploits continue, arousing the jealousy of neighboring princes, until the Sultan decides that it would be prudent to cement an alliance with d’Orlange by making him his son-in-law. The Sultan dies, leaving the Frenchman to reign over Turkey—at this point the stage directions call for d’Orlange to be “at the peak of delirium.” He worries whether his religion is suitable for his new position but reassures himself that his dogma, “to adore the God of the universe,” is also the dogma of the Turks and that everyone in the empire will, following his example, worship a single God. At this moment in the reverie, he is interrupted by his valet, who comes onstage prostrating himself and uttering the word “Sultan.” Thus awakening the engrossed d’Orlange, the valet jokingly apologizes for having “dethroned” the Sultan. But d’Orlange refuses to allow his imaginative operations to be mocked, and he defends them at length and with a certain eloquence. His basic argument is that “everyone”—whether high or low in the social hierarchy—“builds castles in Spain.” These “beautiful dreams” provide a necessary and “useful respite” from the “real cares” that would otherwise overwhelm us. It would be, he implies, foolish not to avail ourselves of this most powerful resource for the effective transformation of our emotional state: “When I dream, I am the happiest of men; and as soon as we believe ourselves happy, we are.”

The ending of Collin’s play thus derives logically from the link that formed its initial premise: the link between vagabondage as a lifestyle and giving oneself over to imagination as a psychological trait. Just as the valet’s entrance awakens d’Orlange from the Turkish daydream, so—but more definitively—does the tangible happiness produced by his own altruistic act awaken him from his tendency to seek out the less real and hence inferior happiness afforded by imagination. Once cured of his mental wandering, he is cured of its physical counterpart, and he proposes to root himself in the soil for the first time through the purchase of a landed property. D’Orlange has never been a really bad man—his Turkish dream is not merely self-aggrandizing but also envisions the spread of a tolerant deism throughout the world—but he is, Collin would have us believe, a far better man for having renounced his self-generated chimeras in favor of a socially shared and validated reality.

Fabre’s Valère is constructed on much the same model of a parallelism between lack of mental fixity and lack of social/physical fixity, but he is a far more negative creation. Utilizing a direct and extensive knowledge of sensationalist psychology and of its associationist corollary, whereby the ideas produced from sense impressions get linked and combined into propositional judgments, Fabre depicts Valère’s imaginings not as an escapist’s vague and misguided quest for happiness but rather as a mode of calculation. As Valère boasts to his valet:

> It is necessary, when one has plans,
> To be sure of success from the beginning:
> But to do so is the gift of a solid judgment,
> Of a mind that is vast, fervent, neither weak nor timid:
> I have that gift. There is a chain, you see,
> That links one object to another unexpected object. . . .
> At a glance, at first sight,
> I perceive in its full extent the chain of phenomena;
> I combine, weigh, and easily divine
> What will result from a given event.
> There, right beneath my eyes, I see a faithful image of the result.
> (Act 1, Scene 1, p. 7)

Imagination, then, is for Valère a means of projecting himself into the future coupled with a conviction that he has the mental acuity to forecast that future accurately, indeed to body it forth “there, right beneath my eyes.” He is the visionary as young man on the make, hence his so-called presumptuousness. This variety of imaginative disorder—and the language of pathology is pejoratively invoked throughout the play to describe Valère[^13]—has led him into a life of audacious risk-taking. It has also led to his refusal to commit himself to an état, where état is, in the eighteenth-century lexicon, both a line of work and a fixed place in the social universe. “He remains sans état,” his father complains in a letter to M. de Franval (Act 1, Scene 3, p. 23) and, much later in the play, Franval enters into a long dialogue with Valère that underscores just that failing. “Do you have an état?” the prospective father-in-law asks Valère pointedly, and the young man flippantly replies, “I have ten of them, if need be.” The two then begin to catalogue Valère’s états, which, it soon emerges, exist for the young man in an unalterably liminal realm between possibility and actuality. “Are you a military man?” Franval inquires. “No,” Valère replies, but he easily could be, having the requisite noble birth and natural talents; he recounts in detail an (imaginary) interview in which he “enchants” the Minister of War with his grasp of strategy and tactics; he has, after all, “brought that great art to a state of ripeness in my head.” He may, he adds a bit defensively, “give the impression of doing nothing, and yet I work”:

> Would you believe it? There is already a battle
> So well imagined in the depths of my brain,
> By means so fresh, a plan so new,
> That to lose it would be, in a word, impossible.

A similar response is elicited by Franval’s question as to whether he is a magistrate: “not yet or at least not par état,” admits Valère, “but possessing an in-depth knowledge of the legal code, the digest, the works of Domat and Beccaria,” he would find nothing easier. Eventually Franval grows exasperated with Valère’s imaginary careers and enunciates what Fabre probably intends as the theme or message of his play. “The most humble artisan in society,” he declares, “is the proof of this verity: that a man sans état deserves ridicule, that the idle (désoeuvrés) are a burden to the world,” and that Valère is “one of them.” Continuing in the solemn voice of authority he has assumed, Franval intones: “To have an état . . . is the common duty, the order, the law prescribed by society.” In his view, Valère’s involvement in an imaginary life explains his blameworthy drifting: “Drunk on the future, . . . you are always hoping and never are anything” (Act 4, Scene 9, pp. 109–13).

In their different registers, then, these two plays of early 1789 concur about the dangers inherent in imagination, the threat that it poses not only to the particular individual in its thrall but, more globally, to social order and stability. Indeed the proper disciplining of imagination (be it through d’Orlange’s happily spontaneous self-correction or through the ostracizing of Valère) is depicted as a necessary condition of social order. And Collin d’Harleville and Fabre d’Eglantine were hardly unique among their late eighteenth-century contemporaries in expressing this anxiety about the effects of overactive, disordered imagination.

### Targeted Mental Operations

The standard eighteenth-century map of the human mental apparatus divided it into the three faculties of memory, reason, and imagination. So widely recognized was this tripartite division that it was used in the Encyclopédie to furnish an overarching scheme for organizing the branches of knowledge from a human rather than a divine point of view. As d’Alembert noted in his Discours préliminaire to the Encyclopédie (1751), all knowledge, as compiled within that ambitious multivolume compendium, was to be categorized by the mental operation primarily responsible for its production: thus history fell into the province of memory, philosophy was the fruit of reason, and the fine arts were born of imagination. The Discours préliminaire did not dwell on the connotations or affective charges carried by these three mental operations. But it is clear from d’Alembert’s brief discussion that he regarded memory as the least problematic, a simple re-presentation by the mind to itself of objects that had earlier been firmly and directly apprehended by the senses. Imagination, on the other hand, inspired obvious indecision and a certain unease. Where, d’Alembert wondered, should it be placed in the encyclopedic scheme: before or after reason? In arguing for its placement after reason, d’Alembert hinted at some of the anxiety that typically attended any pondering of imagination in this period. Imagination must follow reason, he said, because reason in effect provided the standards and criteria necessary for containing it: “Imagination is a creative faculty, and the mind, before it considers creating, begins by reasoning upon what it sees and knows. . . . The more it departs from these objects, the more bizarre and unpleasant are the beings which it forms.”[^14]

One might speculate that at different historical moments, different mental operations—themselves constructed rather than given—are singled out as particularly anxiety-provoking and, hence, as the focus of cultural obsession. In the late twentieth- and early twenty-first-century West, that targeted operation seems to be memory. What to d’Alembert was the relatively uncomplicated retrieval from the mental storehouse of sensory data perceived at some prior moment—he used the phrase “purely passive and almost mechanical” to describe it[^15]—has in our own day, and particularly in light of the mass exterminations of World War II, become fraught with epistemological, psychological, and moral difficulties. The number of recent historical works featuring the word “memory” in their titles bears witness to the strength of this preoccupation.[^16] Memory was also highlighted in the United States in the 1980s and 1990s in the context of a rash of well-publicized lawsuits by adults for incidents of sexual abuse that they allegedly suffered, usually at the hands of their parents, in childhood. Such cases, in which distant but only recently retrieved memories were offered up as legal evidence, pointedly raised and even moved into a popular forum the issue of the nature and reliability of memory.[^17]

The medieval and early modern Western world also lavished attention on the workings of memory, but the nature of its concern was less existential than straightforwardly practical. It took the form of a codified mnemotechnics that sought to train individuals in the art of remembering by instructing them to conceive of their memories spatially, as buildings into whose various rooms, antechambers, nooks, and crannies they carefully deposited their bits of data for safekeeping and swift recovery. Rooted in the texts of Latin antiquity, this mnemotechnics declined in importance during and especially after the Renaissance, a change connected in complex ways to the advent of printing.[^18] At any rate, during the Enlightenment, the source of overt and generalized cultural worry was not memory—the various articles on memory in the Encyclopédie, largely drawn from Condillac’s treatise on sensationalist psychology, devote only a line or two to dysfunctional excesses of forgetting (and remembering) and say not a word about the old discipline of mnemotechnics—but rather imagination. Allowed full and luxuriant freedom of expression during the Renaissance, imagination appears to have subsequently fallen under a ban.[^19] Tellingly, the brunt of the main Encyclopédie article on memory is precisely the admonition to avoid the long-standing confusion between memory and imagination.[^20]

That such an admonition strikes us as odd and superfluous is itself evidence of the continual reworking of cultural constructions and evaluations of the mental faculties. From the perspective of the early twenty-first century, we may wonder how memory and imagination could possibly have been routinely confounded, but, in fact, the traditionally close ties between the two went back to Aristotle’s theory of knowledge. Aristotle had emphasized the necessary participation of imagination in human thought processes; he held that thought worked not on raw sensory impressions but only on those impressions already treated by the intermediary of imagination and consequently transformed into images. Aristotle bolstered his dictum that the “soul never thinks without a mental picture” by reference to the presumably self-evident experience of the necessarily imagistic operation of memory, and this rhetorical move led him to locate memory and imagination in the same part of the soul.

Once cemented by Aristotle, the affiliation of memory and imagination was destined for a long career in the canonical texts of the Western philosophical tradition. Indeed, it is not an exaggeration to say that one of the subthemes of Frances Yates’s magisterial The Art of Memory (1966) is to trace the mutations of that persistent affiliation. Thus Yates notes that the scholastic theologian Thomas Aquinas, who regarded Aristotle as the Philosopher, echoed his mentor by insisting that “memory belongs to the same part of the soul as phantasy.” For Aquinas, the linkage was in effect a concession to human frailty, a permission to make use of the corporeal similitudes of the lower power of imagination as an aid in remembering spiritual intentions. The formally anti-Aristotelian occult philosophy of such Renaissance thinkers as Marsilio Ficino and Giordano Bruno kept the affiliation very much alive, vaunting the power of a divinely or magically animated human imagination to grasp the intelligible shape of the cosmos and enlisting memory training to catalogue the features of a cosmos thus apprehended. Even Francis Bacon, dedicated to banishing “idols” and to approaching nature through observation and experiment, was, in Yates’s view, “profoundly imbued with the classical belief that the mnemonic image has power through stirring the imagination.”[^21]

Condillac would later complain, in his own voice and through anonymous excerpts in the Encyclopédie, that Bacon’s empiricist successor and Condillac’s own source of inspiration, John Locke, had been equally cavalier in his treatment of memory and imagination, failing to make an unambiguous distinction between them.[^22] This complaint marks something like a historical rupture. Where a casual blurring of the two mental faculties had long prevailed, the French Enlightenment took pains to draw a sharp line between memory—now to be regarded as straightforward, objective, unproblematic—and an imagination flagged as harboring an intrinsic potential for danger. The drive to separate what had earlier been offhandedly lumped together signaled at once a neutralization of memory, its transformation into a dependable recording device, and a particular cultural obsession with imagination.

### The Philosophical Discourse of Imagination

While the eighteenth-century French discourse on imagination spilled over into innumerable linguistic settings, its main lines were set in the quasi-technical domain of epistemology and philosophy of mind. Hence, before turning to its wider cultural existence, we need to grasp its basic characteristics in that formative domain, certain of whose marks it tended to bear indelibly. The two philosophical psychologies in question—Cartesianism and sensationalism—were both products of the Scientific Revolution, and both laid claim, implicitly or explicitly, to scientific status. This fact probably contributed to the authority granted them and, at the end of the Old Regime, to the popularity of the discourses of imagination that they undergirded.

The locus classicus of French Enlightenment discussion of imagination was Condillac’s Essai sur l’origine des connaissances humaines, the mid-century treatise that naturalized on French soil a version of Locke’s sensationalist epistemology. In Condillac’s account of the origins of human knowledge, imagination was one of the earlier operations to be generated from the first, simple act of perception that inscribed the initially blank slate of the human mind. It was closely allied to memory, since both were powers of reviving past perceptions independently of the external objects that had initially given rise to them. But, in keeping with his critique of Locke, Condillac took pains to distinguish between the two operations, duly pointing out the benign nature of the one and the potential malignancy of the other. Memory, he noted, could revive only those past perceptions to which “conventional signs”—that is, language—had already been attached. More versatile than memory, imagination could either use these signs or make do without them. Hence, although beasts lacked memory, they possessed imagination; or to put this point differently, imagination was, in its capacity for nonverbal functioning, the more “bestial” of the two operations. The greater vividness and sensuous immediacy of its productions were attributable to the fact that imagination “revives the perceptions themselves,” while memory “only recalls the signs.”[^23]

Imagination had, according to Condillac, a second power deriving directly from the first. Having once reawakened perceptions in the absence of objects, it could forge “new combinations of them at our pleasure.” It thus presented itself as a potential danger to the sober workings of understanding, an obvious point of entry for error. It had the liberty to play, scramble, and embellish, to “transport the qualities of one thing to another”—in short, to dispose of our ideas in a manner “contrary to truth.” Some of these new imaginative linkages were made voluntarily; others—like the sight of a sharp precipice evoking the idea of violent death—bypassed volition and were produced automatically under the influence of an external impression. Such automatic linkages were especially firmly cemented, leaving us powerless to undo them. We could, in effect, easily cease to be “masters” of imagination and instead become its “dupes,” falling victim to “prejudices” that, while based on a chance experience of merely circumstantial juxtapositions, appeared to us as immutable principles.[^24]

Imagination exposed us to another source of error as well: we might lose the capacity to distinguish the imaginary objects in our minds from real objects. In this connection Condillac considered daydreaming. Building “castles in Spain,” or imagining ourselves as the protagonists of a pleasurable story of our own devising, was, he noted, ordinarily a safe and innocent pastime. But if Condillac thus far sounded like the visionary in Collin’s Châteaux en Espagne, he soon adopted a critical stance much more like the playwright’s. He observed that when chagrin and sadness led the daydreamer to withdraw from ordinary social contact, his or her mental productions could acquire a distinctly malignant cast; they could become more tenaciously rooted, and the power of judgment to categorize them as imaginary inventions could correspondingly weaken. “Little by little, we will take all our chimeras for realities.” Hence, Condillac continued, the danger of reading novels—especially for young women, whose relative lack of education contributed to the native inability of their “tender brains” to discriminate between the fictive and the real.[^25]

One did not need to subscribe to sensationalist psychology in order to view imagination as a potentially dangerous mental operation, for a catalog of its dangers had already been compiled during the previous century by philosophers of Cartesian persuasion. Even more than for Condillac, imagination was for the Cartesian Malebranche a profoundly, and suspiciously, corporeal component of the mind. The strict mind-body dualism that was the hallmark of his school led Malebranche to posit an active imagination dependent upon the soul (âme) and directed by the commands of the will, and a passive imagination exclusively bodily in nature, one composed of the “animal spirits that trace these images and [of] the brain fibers on which they are engraved.” The power of imagination was thus never completely within our control because it necessarily resulted from the combination of two factors, only one of which was volitional and the other bodily and passive. As Malebranche described the latter by analogy: “Now, just as the width, depth, and sharpness of the strokes in an engraving depend on the pressure applied to the burin and on the tractability of the copper,” so too the clarity and strength of a product of passive imagination depends on “the force of the animal spirits and the constitution of the brain fibers.”[^26] It followed that purely physical factors—the age and sex of the individual, the type and abundance of diet, the degree of nervous agitation—could render an imagination capable of overpowering reason and even, under certain circumstances, of permanently imprinting brute matter. Malebranche believed, for example, that the mother’s imagination directly influenced the form of the fetus growing in her womb and was responsible for monstrous births—a belief that remained scientifically respectable in France until the early nineteenth century.[^27] He also affirmed that an overheated imagination was contagious, spread from one person to another by propinquity.[^28]

Imagination, then, was intimately linked by both Cartesians and sensationalists with error, defect, monstrosity, and disorder. But a difference in emphasis between these two strands of a single discourse should be underscored here. Because the external environment impinged less upon the Cartesian psyche than it did upon its sensationalist counterpart, the position of the individual in the social structure was in the Cartesian model far less implicated either in unleashing or in containing the perils of imagination than it was in the sensationalist model. Thus, as I will show at some length later in this chapter, the sensationalist construction of imagination had a more pronounced tendency to become involved in social, political, and economic discourse.

The article on imagination in the Encyclopédie was not, like that on memory, drawn from Condillac’s treatise but was composed by Voltaire. While Voltaire adhered to a sensationalist epistemology, he organized his discussion of imagination around the traditional contrast between its passive and active varieties—an indication of the hardly surprising fact that, in the eighteenth-century discourse on imagination, Cartesian and sensationalist strands could be plaited together. Voltaire’s active imagination (the “good” member of the pair) produced fertile new combinations of elements: it invented technologies and created works of art. Although “independent of us” in the sense of being a divinely implanted “gift” of “genius” (ask a hundred people to imagine a certain machine, said Voltaire, and despite all their efforts, ninety-nine will come up with nothing at all), still, in those who possessed it, active imagination was so thoroughly imbued with reflection and judgment that it could be trusted to stay on the course we chose for it. On the other hand, passive imagination (the “bad” member of the pair and the one that humans had in common with animals) escaped our control completely.

Voltaire’s article is noteworthy for the degree to which it used politically inflected language, the language of power relations, to describe passive imagination and the evils to which it conduced.[^29] According to Voltaire, passive imagination blithely and “in spite of us” re-plays what we have seen and heard and, under no obligation to reproduce those perceptions faithfully, adds or omits elements as it pleases. It acts so imperiously (avec empire) that “nothing is more common than the saying, ‘One is not the master of one’s imagination.’” Seducing us by the vividness of its images, this mental operation moreover subverts our will, “push[ing] us toward the objects it paints, or turn[ing] us away from them, according to its manner of representation.” An imagination that thus bedazzles the will is the “ordinary lot of ignorant people.” The ubiquity of this variety of passive imagination seems, in the Voltairean scheme of things, to furnish the psychological substratum of power relations in society since it provides the “instrument” that more clear-thinking men “exploit for purposes of domination.” In other words, an imagination that utterly eludes volitional supervision marks someone out as a person who will be the dupe of others, ruled over rather than ruling.

Another frequent contributor to the Encyclopédie, the Berlin-based Huguenot J.-H.-S. Formey, who pressed sensationalist psychology into the service of moral and religious inquiry, likewise conceptualized the unruliness of imagination in political terms. His article on dreams asserts:

> The waking imagination is a policed republic, where the voice of the magistrate restores everything to order. The imagination during a dream is that same republic in a state of anarchy, with the passions making frequent forays against the legislator’s authority even while his law is in force.[^30]

In other writings, Formey was less sanguine about the degree to which the waking imagination was effectively “policed.” He called the imagination a coursier fougueux[^31]—that is, an impetuous or hot-headed steed, where the etymology of the noun fougue refers to sudden flight (fugue), to the propensity to lack or deviate from a fixed path.[^32] The locution thus recalls Collin’s characterization of the overly imaginative d’Orlange as a “wandering Jew.”[^33] In fact Formey’s portrait of those who succumb to the coursier fougueux resident in our mental apparatus sounds remarkably like Henriette’s disparaging assessment of d’Orlange. Said Formey:

> The imagination is a faculty prone to illusion. Those who begin by yielding to it, and who, so to speak, entrust it with the task of guiding their education, can become wits or clever persons, in the vulgar sense of those terms. They can excel in eloquence and poetry and acquire a brilliant reputation. But they will always lack solidity—a defect that will throw them into aberrant behavior (écarts).”[^34]

Like Condillac, who singled out young women as a group especially vulnerable to the blandishments of imagination and novel-reading as the practice that maximized that vulnerability, so too Formey zeroed in on a high-risk population and practice—a kind of hygienic perspective that was, as we will see, a standard feature of the eighteenth-century discourse on imagination. Formey reserved his anxious concern for young children, who should not, he opined, “be too long left alone to their fantasy games.” Such a nonchalant mode of child-rearing would, in his view, lead youngsters to “acquire the habit, very difficult to eradicate, of being unable to concentrate on anything and of having a distracted mind, an always wandering imagination, when one speaks to them of things that displease them.”[^35] (Formey’s term for “wandering imagination” is une imagination qui bat la campagne, an idiomatic expression often found clustered with “castles in Spain,” with which it not only shares a common theme but also rhymes in French.)[^36] Note that Formey deplores both the cognitive ineptitude of a wandering mind and, perhaps even more vehemently, the fact that such a mind becomes so accustomed to the seductive pleasures promised by imagination that its possessor is inherently resistant to all discipline. A child raised in this fashion simply fails to attend to unpleasant verbal communications, including (we can assume) prohibitions, admonitions, and reprimands. Formey’s warning is clear: overindulge a young child’s penchant for imaginative play, and you will likely end up creating a social monster or, at the very least, a misfit.

### Imagination in Socioeconomic Discourse (1): The Trade Corporation

So familiar a topos did dangerous imagination become in eighteenth-century France that it left its mark in unexpected places, places where it would seem not even to belong—most notably the discourse on the economy. A salient example of this discursive migration is the 1776 remonstrance of the Parlement of Paris against a royal edict of that year abolishing the trade corporations—that is, the guilds of artisans and merchants whose function was to regulate and monopolize the industrial and commercial life of the Old Regime. In part because of the protest of the Parlement, the edict, written by Louis XVI’s “enlightened” chief minister Turgot, remained in force for only about six months; but it resurfaced during the French Revolution and, under the name of the d’Allarde and Le Chapelier laws, dealt its blow definitively in 1791. Hence the Turgot edict can be seen as a kind of dress rehearsal for the socioeconomic individualism that would be successfully inaugurated by the Revolution.

In opposing the abolition, the judges of the Parlement advanced an argument about the necessity of maintaining the integration of the individual within a corporate matrix. The corporate principle, they aptly noted, penetrated their society thoroughly, organizing it as a congeries of self-governing bodies, which included not only the craft and merchant guilds but also (to name just a few) the Church, universities, academies, and courts of law. The corporate structure, they continued, provided a means of mutual protection and of command and surveillance of inferiors by superiors; it thus produced a “general calm” which individual men echoed or responded to by an “inward calm.” The tranquillizing effects of such an institutional arrangement were, they noted, all the more necessary for the “workers,” who by contrast to the guild masters, joined to a “natural brute energy . . . passions less subdued by education.”[^37] Destroy the corporate structure, the judges warned, and “each artisan will regard himself as a solitary being, dependent upon himself alone and free to indulge all the flights of an often disordered imagination.”[^38]

While the socioeconomic reference and direct public policy implications of this psychological observation might strike us as curious, we are already quite familiar with the basic rhetorical structure: a group is identified as particularly vulnerable to the promptings of imagination (in this case, as for Voltaire, that group is the general mass of working people) and, in keeping with the main lines of sensationalist psychology, an external environment particularly liable to lead the imagination astray is also specified. That high-risk environment is (as for Condillac’s disappointed young girls who withdraw from society and seek comfort in novels) solitude, isolation. The rhetoric thus tacitly assumes that a stable communal location exerts a restraining influence on a potentially unruly imagination, presumably by dint of continually reinforcing the “true”—that is, consensual—definition of reality and keeping before the mind a lively image of the boundaries that must not be crossed. Lack of such a fixed location will, conversely, tend to release the imagination from its requisite straitjacket. In this respect the artisan removed from his corporation, as envisioned by the judges of the Parlement, is another version of Collin’s d’Orlange as wandering Jew or Fabre’s Valère as a man sans état. But while d’Orlange and Valère are, to be sure, types rather than idiosyncratic individuals, the wholesale abolition of the corporations can be seen as threatening nothing less than the universalization of that type! In other words, given the prevailing discourse on imagination, and especially the sensationalist psychological strand of that discourse, certain kinds of large-scale socioeconomic change could be readily perceived in late eighteenth-century France as explicitly calling into question the psychological integrity and viability of the individual—as reproblematizing the self.

Jürgen Habermas made a related but by no means identical claim when he noted that “next to political economy, psychology arose as a specifically bourgeois science during the eighteenth century.” Habermas’s assertion capped his tracing of a particular line of historical development: as the scale of capitalist commerce and industry expanded, he maintained, the bourgeois household ceased to be a base of economic operations and, suddenly devoid of function, assumed the completely innovative task of cultivating intimate affective ties between family members and heightening the “audience-oriented subjectivity” of each.[^39] In other words, political economy and psychology—the theorized forms of capitalist enterprise and personal emotional cultivation, respectively—became twin sciences as a result of an increasing division of labor and the consequent differentiation of social space. While I, too, am asserting that economic and psychological science unfolded in tandem during the eighteenth century, I have conceptualized the relationship between the two more locally. My claim is that contemporaries regarded the corporate structure of the Old Regime as the necessary underpinning of persons. Hence threats to the corporate structure (which were a routine feature of the new science of Physiocracy, the forerunner of political economy) produced anxieties about individual mental functioning, especially the possible swamping of reason by imagination. The basic premise of sensationalist psychology reinforced the link, already posited in such anxieties, between the (external) economy and the (internal) psyche. Thus responses to the Turgot decrees were often couched in a psychological idiom; and the actual collapse of corporatism during the Revolution served, to adopt a Foucauldian turn of phrase, as a powerful incitement to psychological discourse.

In their 1776 remonstrance against the Turgot edict, the aristocratic elite represented by the judges of the Parlement articulated a concern about psychological integrity with respect to their manifest inferiors, the people. But the aristocrats were not alone in attributing untoward psychological consequences to laissez-faire. The artisans (or more precisely, the masters among them) articulated much the same concern with respect to themselves. In their handwritten protest against Turgot’s edict in 1776, the Paris glovemakers did not pinpoint the unruly imagination as the source of the trouble, but they sweepingly asserted that “each person (particulier) has an existence only through the corporate body (corps) to which he is attached.”[^40]

This psychological-cum-ontological comment, surprising to modern ears, was made in the context of the glovemakers’ very first objection to Turgot’s policy: merchants and artisans in a “city as highly populated [as Paris]” would, they said, fail to inspire confidence (crédit) if their “existence,” that is to say their stable personal identity and their legal accountability, were not guaranteed in advance by the corporate structure.[^41] Similarly ontological comments about the dependence of a stable personal identity on a stable corporate structure—and especially on the corporation’s surveillance or “police” of its members—dot the protests of master artisans and merchants against the Turgot edict. The Paris tailors described the artisan removed from his corporation as a “faithless Proteus” undergoing a perpetual process of “metamorphosis.”[^42] Many protesters conveyed their ontological presuppositions by employing the polysemic term “subject,” having both the active sense of a thinking and intending being and the passive sense of someone under the king’s jurisdiction, to describe the artisan as that entity constituted and guaranteed by the corporation. Thus the bakers: “through granting admission, the community becomes in some fashion the guarantor of the subject with respect to the public.” Or the buttonmakers: “the first [goal of apprenticeship] is to gain assurance of the capacity of the subject.” Or the clockmakers: “A thrifty subject [i.e., one able to save the money necessary for corporate entrance fees], which is what the artisan in his corporate condition (état) is, is all the more esteemed.”[^43] In language anticipating that of the parlementary remonstrance, the ribbon and fringe makers of the capital stated that “by breaking the ties that bind [us] together, this new system [of limitless freedom] will turn each artisan (fabricant) into an isolated being.” Such isolation was a dangerous condition because the artisan—or indeed anyone else in Old Regime society—was apparently assumed not to exist fully as a freestanding person, not to have internalized the basic moral norms required by his job but to need to have those norms imposed on him from the outside by his corps:

> [Under the regimen of the Turgot edict], he will no longer have to dread the eyes of his colleagues; the corporation’s opinion of him will no longer serve as a brake if he is inclined to embezzle, nor as a spur if he desires to distinguish himself in his art.[^44]

By their own account, then, the incorporated artisans of the Old Regime seem to have lived in what present-day anthropologists call a shame culture, in which the gaze of the other was necessary for the moral and psychological completeness of the individual. In the master cobblers’ formulation of essentially this same point, the public required connaissance—knowledge of or familiarity with—the artisan in order to avoid being “duped” by one who was acting in “bad faith.” This indispensable connaissance, which got translated into reputation, derived from the fact that the incorporated artisan was “subject to the inquiries and examination of that police exercised in the interest of the corporation by its officers (jurés).” The gaze of the corporate regulators thus ensured the reliability and transparency of the incorporated artisan, while the unpoliced solitary artisan remained, from the vantage point of the public, an unknown and opaque quantity “hidden in the corners of the city.”[^45]

In their protests against the Turgot edicts, artisans occasionally sought to make their case through explicit reference to the mental operation of imagination. Predicting that the edicts would prompt “laborious [rural] colonists” (colons) to stream into the cities, the members of the affluent six-corps of Paris postulated as the mechanism for this demographic shift a change in the prevailing mode of imagining an urban future. According to this argument, agricultural day laborers had long been attracted to the reputed pleasures of town life, and only the burdensome obligation to enter a trade corporation in order to obtain work in an urban setting had prevented them from migrating. But, warned the protest of the six-corps, “once the barrier that instilled fear in their imaginations has been lifted,” their movements would henceforth be governed by an unbridled imagination. The depopulation of the countryside would ensue, as well as the demise of the migrants themselves, whose pitiful lack of preparation for the rigors of survival in the city would be revealed. “Such will be the progress of the countryfolk, plucked by a dazzling phantom from their rustic and respectable occupations.”[^46] That a seductive fantasy of urban life would uproot rural laborers from the soil is another instance of the eighteenth-century association of imagination with deracination.

Also using the vocabulary of imagination, the master bakers predicted a different but equally ominous turn of events. The slackening of corporate ties would, in their view, increase the insubordination of apprentices and compagnons:

> The boys are bolder now that the King has made his intention manifest by sending to his parlement an edict suppressing the trade corporations. The master who needs 4, 5 or 6 boys can no longer find them because the boys, imagining themselves able to become masters without having any ability, fortune or means, no longer wish to work. They hold their seditious assemblies more regularly than before. . . .[^47]

If the mere prospect of laissez-faire had so exalted the imaginations of the bakers’ “boys” that they had lost touch with reality and ceased working, so, too, did eighteenth-century discourse make the reverse association—that regular and disciplined work habits enabled an individual to control the inherent waywardness of imagination. In 1753, some two decades before the promulgation of the Turgot edict, the academy of the city of Besançon held a contest for the best essay on the topic, “Which contributes more to society, assiduousness at work or superior talents?” Awarded the second prize was an anonymous composition which argued that an inextricable intertwining of the two, and a kind golden mean between them, was the real desideratum. “What sun is to plants,” said this essayist, “work is to talent.” Talent not only relied on outside sources of nourishment in order to flourish; in its primitive form it also carried within itself “great defects” that, to be rectified, required proportionally “great care and attention (soins).” Chief among those “defects” was imagination, which “operates without order,” and chief among the remedial techniques for a disordered imagination was work. As the essayist put it, drawing upon the vocabulary of wandering so entrenched in the eighteenth-century discourse of imagination, “Assiduity at work is a counterweight which balances the fougues of the imagination.”[^48]

### The Worker’s Imagination Further Scrutinized

The fear of imagination—and of workers’ imagination in particular—that animated the absolute monarchy and the upper orders of Old Regime society found its way into an extremely wide variety of texts. It even figures, for example, in the 1745 police interrogations of a chambermaid to the Versailles nobility. The young woman, Marie-Magdeleine Bonafon, had been arrested and detained at the Bastille for writing a clandestinely published roman à clef critical of Louis XV. Conducted by the highest official in the Paris police bureau, the Lieutenant-General, the interrogations touched several times on the issue of how this humble woman had acquired the knowledge necessary to carry out her nefarious project. Had a socially superior accomplice supplied her with information about recent goings-on in royal circles and with the obscure history books that enabled her to cloak her depiction of the French court in Persian garb, he asked, or had she “composed the work from her own imagination”?

The chambermaid repeatedly affirmed the latter alternative, stating that she had worked on the novel “all alone,” that the details had come solely from her “imagination,” that she had possessed a “head filled with everything that was being talked about at that time” and that it was upon this store of mental material that her “imagination [had] worked.” While the Lieutenant-General eventually accepted her account as truthful, he was not reassured by it. After all, he mused, the novel contained “specific facts not naturally within the purview of [a chambermaid’s] état.” That feats of imagination might mentally propel a chambermaid beyond her état and transform her into a deft creator of seditious writings seemed to the police chief as much a threat to public order as that such a person might achieve the same end through conspiratorial intrigue with one of her betters. On the basis of the general discursive lines laid out in this chapter, we can hypothesize that the police chief regarded the inflamed imagination of an insufficiently supervised female member of the lower orders as a potential menace in its own right.[^49]

Another example of the fear of the disorderly imaginations of working people can be found in the inaugural documents and institutional arrangements of the Ecole gratuite de dessin, the drawing school for young artisans established by private subscription and with royal letters patent in the late 1760s.[^50] The prime mover in this enterprise was one J.-J. Bachelier, a member of the Royal Academy of Painting and Sculpture and a frequent recipient of commissions for murals in the king’s chateaux. Having risen to this very comfortable status from modest, petit bourgeois origins (his mother sold porcelain in the Palais Royal), Bachelier seems, according to one modern commentator, “to have remembered his difficult beginnings as a penniless artist and to have wanted to provide a large number of children [in similarly disadvantaged circumstances] with the kind of formal instruction that he himself had acquired only by accident.”[^51] But whatever his personal motives in establishing the Ecole gratuite de dessin, Bachelier repeatedly stressed both in his public pronouncements and through his pedagogical regimen the need to subject young artisans, for the sake of their own cognitive development as well as for the good of society, to an appropriately strict discipline—one aimed at the imagination.

Education in drawing, Bachelier insisted in 1766, must begin with geometry, for geometry “alone can arrest deviant flights (écarts) of the imagination, contain imagination within the limits of reason, and make ideas circulate (if I may be permitted to express myself thus) within steady and legitimate (réguliers) channels.”[^52] Another proponent of the drawing school seconded this emphasis on geometry, citing the same rationale as Bachelier but couching it in the more perfervid rhetoric of “monstrous” imagination. Given the habits of “dangerous idleness” usually instilled “from the earliest years of childhood in every citizen destined to the occupation of artisan,” the drawing school was obliged to inculcate an opposing set of mental habits. Hence, in its curriculum,

> geometry must necessarily preside over the other sciences; the certitude of its proofs, the self-evidence of its operations, the demonstration of its calculations, the order that it establishes in the train of ideas are just so many reasons to employ it in order to put a brake on the boiling imagination of these youths, who cannot be too much put on guard against the seductions of bad taste, the force of example, and the attractions of the frivolous and the outlandish. Geometry is the womb of mental operations: it matures them, gives birth to them at term and in a condition when they can no longer be either abortions or monsters.[^53]

Bachelier in fact gave geometry pride of place in his curriculum,[^54] but mathematical instruction hardly exhausted his disciplinary endeavors. He set up in the heart of the school a regimen of internal police that Michel Foucault could easily have cited as evidence in favor of his thesis in Discipline and Punish. Pupils received papers certifying their right to admission to the classes of the school, but those papers required formal renewal every three months; and renewal was in turn granted only on the basis of regular attendance, which was monitored by a system of tokens or jetons. The student received a jeton each day that he appeared at school, and his jetons were supposed to be submitted to daily inspection by both his schoolmasters and his parents. As the three-month admission certificate, signed by “Monsieur Bachelier, Director,” admonished: “Parents, as well as Schoolmasters, are earnestly implored to watch over attentively the assiduity of those [pupils] for whom they have responsibility, making sure that on Monday they are presented with a jeton for Monday, and so on for the remaining days of the week. . . .”[^55] Geometry instruction was thus only one feature of an environment deliberately designed to anchor the young, low-born artisan-in-training in real social demands and thus to substitute sober, instrumental reason for the seductive beckonings of imagination.

### Imagination in Socioeconomic Discourse (2): Credit

The eighteenth-century discourse of imagination intersected in another way with that of the modernizing economy. Just as, for critics of laissez-faire, the artisan suddenly loosed from his corporate moorings became a hapless pawn of imagination, so, too, for critics of the so-called financial revolution, a whole series of sophisticated new institutions—banks, the national debt, the extension of credit—introduced into interactions among people an imaginary element subversive of social, political, and even epistemological stability. John Pocock’s work on the civic republican tradition in early eighteenth-century England suggests the regularity with which this second rhetorical figure—the perverse permeation of the world of finance by imagination—was employed on the other side of the Channel. As Pocock tells the story, the seventeenth-century Harringtonian variety of English civic republicanism had linked the virtuous republican “personality”—the choice of word is Pocock’s—to property ownership. But by the Augustan era, the financial revolution had called the very reality of property into question; property could now assume forms that were not merely mobile but also quite possibly imaginary! In the language of such commentators as Joseph Addison and Daniel Defoe, whom Pocock quotes at length, credit was a product of the imagination, a testament to the power of imagination, its fluctuations dependent upon imagination’s caprices.[^56] This new situation seriously undermined the integrity of the (property-based) political personality assumed to be the mainstay of a self-governing state.

Although France lagged behind England in creating modern institutions of banking and credit, a text that we have already considered indicates that by 1776 the concept of imagination had insinuated itself not only into the debate over the guilds but also into the financial branch of French socioeconomic discourse. That text is the parlementary remonstrance against the Turgot edict. Capacity for citizenship was clearly not at issue in the strictures against credit penned by these aristocratic judges serving an absolutist monarchy. But at the beginning of their remonstrance, they chastised the king for the ever-mounting loans taken out by the state, noting that this policy had “raised up, alongside of real assets (fonds réels), a new sort of value which already constitutes the patrimony of many families.” These “fictive assets (fonds fictifs),” they continued, had “with respect to real assets, a marked disadvantage” in that they did not “rest on an unalterable and certain foundation.”[^57] The king’s penchant for borrowing had, in other words, indirectly undermined his subjects, eroding their ability to maintain an intergenerational stability and continuity.

The great historical moment for the flowering of a specifically financial discourse of imagination occurred not in 1776 but about a half-century earlier. It was the moment of John Law, of the feverish speculative ventures launched by that Scotsman in the several years before 1720 in his grandiose efforts to refinance the debts of the French and British states. In the English context, the South Sea Bubble was so widely depicted as an example of imagination run amok that the abundant pamphlet literature even ventured into psychopathology. (The regnant Lockean epistemology, which would later furnish Condillac with a model, defined madness as a disordered imagination.)[^58] It included a tongue-in-cheek contribution by the pseudonymous Sir John Midriff, M.D., “Observations on the Spleen and Vapours: Containing Remarkable Cases of Persons of both Sexes, and all Ranks, from the aspiring Director to the humble Bubbler, who have been miserably afflicted with those melancholy Disorders since the Fall of South-Sea and other publick Stocks.”[^59] Dr. Midriff had a good deal to say about imagination as he recounted his case histories. One patient, complaining of giddiness, faintness, and a pain in the left side, traced his ailment to a day spent in “Exchange-Alley” waiting to sell stock; he believed his symptoms “occasion’d by a Jew who came to beat down the Price of Stocks, carrying a large Bag of Money, which, by reason of the Crowd, happen’d to be press’d several times against his Side.” Learning that the afflicted gentleman “had been an Adventurer in the South-Sea [Company],” Dr. Midriff hastens to tell him that giddiness of the type he described “always denoted Trouble of Mind, either from some external Cause, which is able to make too violent Impressions on our Imaginations, or from our own distemper’d Imaginations alone.” He opines that the pain in the side and the faintness stem not from the transient pressure exerted by the Jew’s money bag but from that “same Universal Cause” of disordered imagination. As the narrative progresses and the physician is consulted by a long succession of ailing investors, his own imagination goes momentarily awry:

> The vast many miserable Objects I had seen dwelt so on my own Imagination, that I began to think the Distemper infectious; and for that Reason, I kept at Home one whole Day. . . . And just as I imagin’d, many of the Symptoms soon took hold of me, and no one can conceive the great Disorders I labour’d under for the Space of fourteen Hours. . . . But after I had slept upon it, I summon’d all my Reason, and found my Body was perfectly well, and that my Disturbances were only imaginary; I put on a Resolution not to give way to any such Prepossession. . . .[^60]

The French version of the John Law moment entailed the establishment of a central bank, the issue of paper currency, and the floating of stock in the Compagnie de l’Occident (usually referred to by the name “Mississippi” because it monopolized the Louisiana trade). It amounted, in fact, to nothing less than the privatization of the French treasury, lately bankrupted by the wars of Louis XIV. Law’s “System,” as it was routinely called, was based on the Scotsman’s monetary theory: that in an environment of unemployed resources, the issue of paper currency would permanently expand real commerce, thereby increasing the demand for paper currency to such a degree as to preclude inflation. In other words, to finance a great economic project, an entrepreneur manipulated the imaginary; he needed only the power to create claims that served as a mode of payment, and those claims would eventually materialize as real monetary value.[^61]

Just as the aristocratic Parlement of Paris bristled at Turgot’s abolition of the guilds, so, too, some six decades earlier they resisted the Crown’s willingness to entrust the treasury into Law’s hands. Most important for our purposes was the rhetoric of their resistance: in both cases, the radical changes involved in economic modernization seemed to the parlementaires a dangerous substitution of reality by fantasy—be that fantasy the solitary artisan’s untrammeled imagination, the “fictive assets” of property in stocks and bonds, or the blatant manipulation of monetary value on the theory that a well-played confidence game would in time conjure up substance from illusion. If anything, the mechanics of Law’s System—especially the repeated insistence on public confiance in a future, as-yet-unrealized economic vitality[^62]—led more naturally and inevitably to a discourse of imagination than did Turgot’s freeing of the market in labor.

[To view this image, refer to the print version of this title.]

Figure 1: “Fancy, the Ruler of the Guild of Smoke-Sellers, Paints her Mississippi which Wastes the Treasures of France.” The satirical title of this Dutch broadside, published in 1720 in response to the John Law affair in France, reveals the pan-European scope of the discourse linking dangerously overstimulated imagination to the eighteenth-century financial revolution and its vast extension of credit. (The British Museum, Department of Prints and Drawings, © Copyright The British Museum)

While initially cooperative about registering the edicts that put the System in place, the Parlement balked in 1718 when the Crown, reneging on its earlier promise to issue all paper currency in écus redeemable by specie at strict face value, decreed a devaluation and reminting.[^63] What was, in part, intolerable to the judges about this new policy was that it injected the imaginative dimension into public affairs. Although the king had, they readily acknowledged, exclusive right to coin the money of the realm, “it is not his stamp that confers value”; rather, value was an inherent attribute, residing in the “quantity and purity of the precious metal” composing the coin.[^64] By departing from the doctrine of bullionism, with its strict table of equivalences between signs and things, the Crown was, the parlementaires declared, tampering with the legibility of reality—creating “a chaos so great and so obscure that nothing about it can be known.”[^65]

The parlementaires did not in this instance actually use the word “imagination” (they summoned up a cluster of concepts associated with it). But the word itself was featured in other contemporaneous commentaries on the Law affair. In an anonymous pamphlet of 1721 taking the form of an exchange of letters between a French and a British nobleman, the French duke comes out against not only Law’s scheme but any system of public credit. He believes that the credit extended between private individuals is both safer than the public variety and also “sufficient to enable the circulation of all the productions of Art and Nature in France.” If the goal is to stimulate agriculture, manufacture, and commerce, then, says the duke, the correct course of action is to decrease the taxes that “weigh down the people and strip them of the strength and courage to work.” Nothing is to be gained by Law’s alternate route, defined here as “the multiplication of money by an imaginary credit that deters honest industry and augments luxury.” The English lord, who thinks that his own countrymen have been more deeply scarred by Law’s experiments than have the French, nonetheless believes in the necessity of a system of public credit. (“There is neither sufficient gold nor silver in Europe to enable the circulation of all the productions of Art and Nature.”) But he echoes his French colleague in expressing a horror of “imaginary” credit:

> Public credit must be both supported by and proportional to real assets (fonds réels). In that way, it will always be convertible into specie by private persons and hence will remain free. . . . A credit founded on the hope of distant gain becomes imaginary. If it exceeds the real assets that correspond to it, it loses its value; and if it is forced, it loses its nature as credit.[^66]

Like the parlementaires of Paris and the anonymous author of the pamphlet, Montesquieu approached Law’s System from an aristocratic standpoint, and his Persian Letters (1721) bitterly satirized it as an abuse of imagination. The “Fragment of an Ancient Mythologist” in Letter 142, a thinly disguised rendition of the Law affair, tells the story of the son of Aeolus. Although as a child he could distinguish so accurately between metals that he petulantly refused the gift of a brass ring, he attempts in adulthood to make his living by selling bags of wind. He travels to the land of Baetica and, displaying his airy merchandise, addresses the people: “You think you are rich because you have gold and silver. Your error arouses my pity. Believe me and leave the country of base metals. Come to the Empire of the Imagination and I promise you riches that will surprise even you.” The next day he expatiates on the combined economic-psychological exercise that he is recommending: “Do you want to be rich? . . . Each morning put it into your head that your fortune has doubled during the night. Then arise, and if you have creditors, go pay them with what you have imagined and tell them to do some imagining of their own.” In a subsequent pronouncement, the traveling salesman, sensing that his scheme is on the verge of failure, locates the source of the economic malaise in the insufficient liveliness of the people’s imaginations.[^67]

So regularly was Law’s System attacked in France for its allegedly imaginary nature that Law himself—who, in the face of mounting opposition, directed considerable propaganda to the general public—replied to that charge. How, he asked rhetorically, could his System be “chimerical”? Didn’t the successful examples of the Dutch, English, and Portuguese “furnish certain proof of its solidity and reality”? As for stock certificates, it was necessary to disabuse oneself of the “vulgar prejudice” that they were “imaginary property” just because their number exceeded the amount of gold and silver in the realm; not bullion but rather “the immense profits of domestic and foreign trade constitute the value of this paper.”[^68] An anonymous pamphlet of 1720, written in defense of the System, echoed Law’s own rhetoric. Opponents of the System were said to dismiss stock certificates as “false and chimerical property” on the grounds that their cumulative face value exceeded that of the precious metals in the realm. But, rejoined the pamphleteer, the value of the capital inherent in the houses of Paris or the soil of France also surpassed that of the specie circulating within French borders or, for that matter, of “all the gold still contained in the mines of Peru”; yet no one would contend that such houses and land therefore sold for a “chimerical price.” To those “rentiers” who saw dividend-yielding stock as “only imaginary property” and hence refused to invest their profits in it, the pamphleteer retorted: “They will soon see [in the development of sea and river transportation, the repair of roads, etc.] the fruits that this imaginary property is alone capable of producing and that real properties would have left in eternal nullity.”[^69]

The eighteenth-century discussion of credit was not, of course, confined to the period of intense debate over Law’s System. As the 1776 parlementary remonstrance suggests, a nearly continual public conversation took place on the subject of the borrowing practices of a financially precarious monarchy. At the level of everyday practice, furthermore, credit impinged upon the consciousness of the humblest shopkeeper. By the eighteenth century, hard-minted coin constituted only a small fraction of the medium of exchange actually circulating in France; most sales of merchandise were made on credit, giving rise to written pledges of future payment—promissory notes and bills of exchange—that in turn circulated in lieu of specie, changing hands a multitude of times. Thus founded on a makeshift medium of exchange, the commercial life of eighteenth-century France was punctuated every few years by an occurrence that contemporaries called a “money famine” (disette d’argent). The perceived shortage of specie, usually of several months’ duration, was in fact a fluctuation in the credit market. A widespread, panicky conviction that hard times were imminent, rooted perhaps in a few bankruptcies or the rumor of war, led customers to refuse to relinquish their cash or to buy on credit; it led the authors of promissory notes to refuse to pay them when they fell due. The initial fears thus proved self-fulfilling: debts were called in, purchases came to a halt, interest rates soared, and prices plummeted. For those contemporaries who realized that the so-called money famine was nothing of the sort but was rather a prevailing conviction of misery in the midst of plenty, this periodic phenomenon was another instance of the disruption caused by credit, which injected its pernicious dosages of unreality into the conduct of ordinary life.[^70]

### Self-Contained Persons: The Odd Trio

The belief that a laissez-faire economy would dangerously overstimulate the imagination placed the isolated homo economicus, whether in the form of an unincorporated artisan or an individual buyer of stock certificates, in the company of two other eighteenth-century figures whose solitary practices were also widely decried and attributed to overactive imagination—namely, the masturbator and the (usually female) reader of novels. Like the participant in the laissez-faire economy, the other individuals making up this distinctly odd trio were time-bound, historical products, the creatures of their era.

Masturbation was, to be sure, hardly a discovery of the eighteenth century, but not until that time was it singled out for serious scientific discussion and intense pedagogical condemnation. A much-cited anonymous English book of 1710 followed in 1760 by the French-language treatise of the Swiss Protestant physician Samuel-Auguste Tissot are generally cited as the origins of what Michel Foucault called, in a felicitous phrase, “the war against onanism, which in the West lasted nearly two hundred years.”[^71] The author of the Onania and Dr. Tissot defined masturbation as a disease, one threatening enough that its sequelae might include insanity and even death. But as the recent work of Thomas Laqueur has underscored, the brunt of their attack was not so much that masturbation depleted vital spermatic fluid or that it sexualized the young precociously but rather that, predicated upon the titillating charms of a fantasied partner, it was a transaction occurring entirely in the realm of imagination. Masturbation was for these eighteenth-century crusaders not primarily a sinful pleasure but a deceitful one, not an inappropriate satisfaction of a real desire but a succumbing to a made-up, artificial appetite. Its fundamental danger as a practice—its true scandal—lay in the fact that, by dint of its largely imaginary nature, it eluded all natural, interpersonal, and social limitation. Just as the imagination was susceptible to no external sanctions and could never be prevented from working, so masturbation opened the possibility of endlessly renewed desire endlessly gratified. In its ceding of ultimate authority to the imagination, masturbation effectively established an order of disorder.[^72]

The Rousseau of the Confessions (a text composed during the 1760s) fits these specifications almost with the perfection of an ideal type, for he presents his eroticism as having been from early childhood bound up with the workings of his imagination. Describing the spankings he received at the age of eight from Mademoiselle Lambercier and the sexual feelings they perversely elicited, Jean-Jacques notes that he long failed to yield to those urgent sensations and “kept myself pure and unsullied up to an age when even the coldest and most backward natures have developed.” Yet critically, what he denied himself in reality, he indulged in imagination—and indulged not merely eagerly but, in keeping with the peculiar unrestricted nature of the imaginative realm, limitlessly. “Tormented for a long while by I knew not what, I feasted feverish eyes on lovely women, recalling them ceaselessly to my imagination, but only to make use of them in my own fashion as so many Mademoiselle Lamberciers.”[^73] A decade or so later, already an adept of fantasied sexual experience, he expands his repertory by taking up masturbation (or, as he puts it, he loses his “moral” though not his “physical virginity”), fully cognizant of the gravely pathological nature of the habit (“various kinds of excesses that eventually imperil [young men’s] health, their strength, and sometimes their lives”). In self-punitive tones, he notes the almost ontological deceitfulness of his newly adopted practice, calling it “that dangerous means of cheating Nature.” And, even more strongly than in his discussion of Mademoiselle Lambercier, he underscores the peculiar omnipotence—the freedom from all natural and social constraints—with which its imaginary component endows him:

> This vice, which shame and timidity find so convenient, has a particular attraction for lively imaginations. It allows them to dispose, so to speak, of the whole female sex at their will, and to make any beauty who tempts them serve their pleasure without the need of first obtaining her consent.[^74]

In terms of the widespread, nearly ubiquitous nature of the discourse on imagination that I have been arguing for and tracing in this chapter, it is worth noting that Rousseau’s earliest indictments of masturbation, which linked that practice to imagination, were made in ignorance of Tissot’s soon-to-be classic text. Only after Jean-Jacques’ opinions had appeared in print did the Swiss physician write to him, exclaiming over the uncanny similarity of their views and the convergence of their independently pursued lines of reasoning.[^75]

The debate about that new literary form, the novel, was likewise part of the discourse on imagination. When Condillac chose the example of novel-reading to spell out the sensationalist-psychological mechanism by which a combination of solitude and an overstimulated imagination might loosen a person’s grip on reality, he was treading a familiar discursive path. Since the inception of the novel, contemporaries had been unable to separate the issue of its aesthetic validity from the hygienic issue of whether arousing the imagination on a routine basis would have salutary or pernicious effects. Imagination inhered, after all, in the very definition of the novel: “a fictive story of diverse human adventures, marvelous or plausible,” according to the Encyclopédie.[^76] Defenders of the genre were thus, ipso facto, defenders of the imagination.

The founding father of that school, the late seventeenth-century anti-Cartesian philosopher Pierre-Daniel Huet, even sought to make his case for the novel by radically redefining the imagination, endowing it with loftier attributes that it was usually said to possess. Humans did not, he protested, share the capacity for imagination with animals. Imagination was rather the answer to a uniquely and poignantly human sense of lack—a lack that could never be filled by objects present to the senses.[^77] Seeking to account for the “vivacity” with which certain of his compatriots had “unleashed their fury against novels,” Huet’s supporter Nicolas Lenglet-Dufresnoy observed in 1734 that it was a “treat for bigots to proscribe everything capable of satisfying the mind and the imagination.”[^78] Conversely, Armand-Pierre Jacquin’s 1755 polemic against the novel maintained that the “turbulent faculty” of the imagination served no useful purpose in the “career” of a mind that moved (in accordance with sensationalist psychology) from simple ideas to combinations of ideas and then to judgments and other forms of reasoning.[^79] Imagination and gender were closely linked in this debate. The critics who took their stand on the side of imagination also articulated a version of French literary history—the version destined to be forgotten by posterity—which portrayed the female novelists of the late seventeenth century as playing a decisive role in the legitimation of the new narrative form. Those hostile to the imagination put forth the canonical version of that same history, in which any positive female influence was repressed: the early period of the novel’s pariah status was said to correspond to the domination of the field by women authors, and the novel’s subsequent acceptance into the literary mainstream to the better product turned out by the men who eventually assumed firm and sober control over the business of novel-writing.[^80]

The debate about the novel was even more irrevocably a debate about the hygiene of the imagination because, during the eighteenth century, reading had become increasingly coded as a solitary practice. Whether or not a statistically significant shift occurred around the year 1750 from the intensive, often oral and group reading of a few venerated books to the extensive, purely personal, silent and one-time reading of many assorted titles—a shift that the historian Rolf Engelsing discerned in the German-speaking lands and labeled a “reading revolution”[^81]—it seems clear that eighteenth-century French iconography abounded in images of solitary readers. When the chambermaid Marie-Magdeleine Bonafon, accused of seditious writing in 1745, told her police interrogator that she had never sought instruction in the art of composition but had rather “acquired a taste for writing by reading a great deal” and had worked on both those skills “all alone,”[^82] her self-description jibed well with the paintings and drawings produced during that era.[^83]

In terms of stock eighteenth-century anxieties, the Rousseau of the Confessions presents himself as the ideal-typical reader of novels much as he embodied the ideal-typical masturbator. He confides that his “restless imagination,” acting very much in the Condillacian mode of that faculty, “nourish[ed] itself on situations that had interested me in my reading, recalling them, varying them, combining them, and giving me so great a part in them, that I became one of the characters I imagined, and saw myself always in the pleasant situations of my own choosing.” But as always in the eighteenth-century scenario of a gratifying escape into imagination, the pleasures thus accrued come at a high price. Like Condillac’s female adolescent reader, the young Rousseau moves inexorably from a “love for imaginary objects” and an ease in giving himself over to them to a rejection of “my real condition, which so dissatisfied me,” and ultimately to a deeply entrenched “love of solitude.” Unlike his Condillacian counterpart, he does not thereby lose his reason. But he does acquire a “misanthropic” character which, almost a variant of madness, he ascribes to a fundamental alteration of his relationship to reality: finding no living creatures akin to his own “tender nature,” he chose instead “to feed upon fictions.”[^84]

The repeated linkage between practices—whether economic, sexual, aesthetic, or entertaining—that could or were alleged to be suitably performed alone and the specter of an unreined imagination enables a fine-tuning and further specification of the thesis of this chapter. Especially in the context of a widely accepted sensationalist psychology, which postulated the direct impingement of the external environment—including the social environment—on the mind, the fretful eighteenth-century preoccupation with imagination was, it appears, fed by a perceived increase both in the possibilities for and in the cultural validation of satisfying solitary endeavor. In a variety of domains, the ability of the individuals to attenuate their reliance on organized society was being insistently advertised, both by those who commended it (the political economists) and those who abhorred it (the antimasturbation crusaders).

Michael Fried’s argument for the “primacy of absorption” in French painting from roughly the 1750s through the 1780s points to yet another domain in which parallel assertions about individual self-sufficiency were being made. According to Fried, painters gravitated to—and anti-Rococo critics lauded—the representation of human subjects absorbed in their own interior states and oblivious to their environment. Fried contends that a new visual aesthetic was being hammered out by means of the preference granted to this subject matter, an aesthetic centered on a particular relationship between painting and beholder. According to this theory, best articulated at the time by Diderot, the self-absorbed subject ignored and implicitly negated the existence of the beholder of the painting; the beholder was in turn—and paradoxically—kept all the more riveted before a scene that was not being staged for his benefit and in whose veracity he was therefore more inclined to believe.[^85]

Although, in tracing this shift in aesthetic values, Fried has no specific interest in the discourse on overactive imagination, his argument helps to strengthen my claim about a late eighteenth-century French cultural preoccupation with the self-contained individual. That individual could announce an independence of and indifference to society and its members in a variety of their guises: he had no need of them as organizers of the production and distribution of goods, as sexual objects, as sources of amusement and distraction—or even, according to Fried, as spectators who witnessed his existence. Indeed the same logic seems to be at play in the new economic claim that the artisan can labor effectively without the eyes of the corporation upon him and the new aesthetic claim that the subject of painting most worth viewing is the one who performs for no viewer. The more that practical possibilities and opportunities for individual self-sufficiency were recognized, the more danger seemed to inhere in imagination; for an imagination stimulated in solitude, without the forces for containment that social institutions provided, was the imagination most prone to go awry.

To be sure, the dangers of imagination were not in eighteenth-century discourse associated only with practices that occurred in full or relative isolation. Take, for example, the 1784 report of the royal commission appointed by Louis XVI to examine animal magnetism. It decried the contemporary vogue of the mesmeric baquet—the large tub equipped with iron rods around which Parisians clustered in order to be sent into convulsion by the mesmerist and thus, allegedly, to be cured of whatever ailed them by means of a redistribution of their personal complements of magnetic fluid. The convulsions were, said the commissioners, authentic enough, but Mesmer’s explanation of them lacked all scientific merit and glossed over their perilous implications. Instead of being caused by the mesmerist’s arcane tinkering with some universal magnetic fluid, they derived quite simply from his hyperstimulation of the imaginations of the persons congregated around the tub. Now in such a setting hyperstimulated imagination was obviously a collective rather than a solitary phenomenon. In fact, the commissioners explicitly and repeatedly noted its collective aspects: the mutual reinforcement of different individuals’ vibrating nerves which, acting much like violin strings, intensified the overall effect; the possibility that the imagination-induced convulsions might spread by contagion to persons absent from the original scene. In recommending that public mesmeric treatments be banned, the commissioners, apprehensively extrapolating from the fairly modest attendance at the baquet, stressed the special vulnerability of the imagination in crowd situations. Contrary to the linkage of imagination and solitude that I have been tracing in this chapter, they intoned, “Imagination governs the multitude”; when “men [are] gathered in large numbers, [they] are more enthralled by their senses and reason has less power over them.”[^86]

From the perspective of controlling the imagination, solitary individuals and those in a crowd were, however, not so much antithetical terms as opposite sides of the same coin: both the isolate and the member of an ad hoc crowd led fundamentally extra-institutional existences; both were prone to mental wandering and aberration precisely because they were exempt from the rules that governed conduct and the tasks that demanded attention in institutional settings—from, in a word, the local reality that such institutions defined and enforced. It is difficult to say which of the two, the isolate or the crowd member, inspired greater unease and more apocalyptic musings in the later eighteenth century; very likely the two often went together, as in the example mentioned earlier of the “bakers’ boys” who, having heard of the imminent promulgation of the Turgot edict, cease working because they imagine themselves able to get ahead without honing their skills and then find themselves drawn into “seditious assemblies.” But I suspect that, before the mob violence of the Revolutionary decade gave a special affective charge to the crowd, the dominant specter was of a world of self-enclosed, atomistic individuals, so nourished on their own imaginations that they lost contact with a shared, consensual reality and were propelled away from the social center in innumerable directions as if by centrifugal force.

### NOTES

For the source of the epigraph, see note 38.

[^1]: 1. Journal de Paris, 8 January 1789, p. 39.

[^2]: 2. Etienne Bonnet de Condillac, Essai sur les origines des connoissances humaines, in Oeuvres philosophiques de Condillac, ed. Georges Le Roy, 3 vols. (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1947–51), 1: 30.

[^3]: 3. “Powerful cabal” is the phrase attributed to Fabre by L. Thiessé, “Notice sur Fabre d’Eglantine,” in Oeuvres choisies de Fabre d’Eglantine (Paris: Dabo-Butschett, 1824), p. 10. The term “cabal” was a mainstay of late eighteenth-century disputes about theatrical merit and the propriety of audience behavior; see, e.g., Jeffrey S. Ravel, “Seating the Public: Spheres and Loathing in the Paris Theaters, 1777–1788,” French Historical Studies 18 (1993): 173–210.

[^4]: 4. Saint-Marc Girardin, “Collin d’Harleville et Fabre d’Eglantine,” Essais de littérature et de morale, 2 vols. (Paris: Charpentier, 1845), 1: 124–43, esp. 124.

[^5]: 5. Fabre memorialized the episode by indicating on the title page of the published play both its partial suppression in January 1789 and its successful full performance 13 months later; see the 1790 edition (Paris: Prault). By contrast, Collin’s Châteaux en Espagne was well-received before the outbreak of the Revolution; see the review of its premiere in Journal de Paris, 21 February 1789, pp. 236–37.

[^6]: 6. “Lettre de M. Fabre d’Eglantine à Monsieur De ***** relativement à la contestation survenue au sujet du Présomptueux ou l’heureux imaginaire et les Châteaux en Espagne” (n.p., n.d.). The first page of the pamphlet dates the letter 12 January 1789. For the quotations from this pamphlet in the next several paragraphs, see pp. 4–9.

[^7]: 7. See Montaigne, Essais, 3 vols. (Paris: Garnier, 1952), 1: 28–30.

[^8]: 8. Lettre de M. Fabre d’Eglantine à Monsieur De *****, p. 9, italics in the original.

[^9]: 9. For this characterization of the play, see Laurence Hervey Skinner, Collin d’Harleville, Dramatist, 1755–1806 (New York: Publications of the Institute of French Studies, 1933), p. 94.

[^10]: 10. Collin d’Harleville, Les Châteaux en Espagne, comédie en cinq actes, en vers, Act 1, Scene 1 in Théâtre et poésies fugitives, 4 vols. (Paris: Duminil-Lesueur, 1805), 1: 238. All subsequent citations to Collin’s play refer to this edition.

[^11]: 11. The matter is somewhat more complex and whimsical. As soon as he announces his plan to become a sober landowner and husband, d’Orlange once more begins spinning daydreams of his future life. Hence the valet observes at the play’s closing that his master “no longer wishes to but still builds castles in Spain.” Act 5, Scene 10, p. 346.

[^12]: 12. All citations from Fabre’s play are from Philippe François Nazaire Fabre d’Eglantine, Le Présomptueux, ou l’heureux imaginaire, comédie en cinq actes en vers (Paris: Prault, 1790).

[^13]: 13. See, e.g., Act 1, Scene 3, pp. 22–23.

[^14]: 14. Jean le Rond d’Alembert, Preliminary Discourse to the Encyclopedia of Diderot (1751), trans. Richard N. Schwab (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1963), pp. 49–51, quotation on p. 51, my italics.

[^15]: 15. Ibid., p. 50.

[^16]: 16. See, for example, the sprawling, influential series edited by Pierre Nora, Les lieux de mémoire, 7 vols. (Paris: Gallimard, 1984–92); Yosef Hayim Yerushalmi, Zakhor: Jewish History and Jewish Memory (New York: Schocken, 1989); James E. Young, The Texture of Memory: Holocaust Memorials and Meaning (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993); Alain Finkelkraut, La mémoire vaine: Du crime contre l’humanité (Paris: Gallimard, 1989); Henry Rousso, The Vichy Syndrome: History and Memory in France since 1944 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991), which is the English translation of a work that lacks the word “memory” in the original French title; Daniel J. Sherman, The Construction of Memory in Interwar France (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999); Alon Confino and Peter Fritzsche, eds., The Work of Memory: New Directions in the Study of German Society and Culture (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2003); and Stéphane Gerson, The Pride of Place: Local Memories and Political Culture in Nineteenth-Century France (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2003).

[^17]: 17. See, for example, the two-part essay review by Frederick Crews, “The Revenge of the Repressed,” New York Review of Books, 17 November 1994, pp. 54–60, and 1 December 1994, pp. 49–58, which discusses no less than six recent books devoted to that subject.

[^18]: 18. The standard source on this subject is Frances A. Yates, The Art of Memory (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966); the exportation to China of Western mnemotechnics by a late seventeenth-century Italian Jesuit is the subject of Jonathan D. Spence, The Memory Palace of Matteo Ricci (New York: Viking Penguin, 1984). As Yates notes, the art of memory dwindled among Renaissance humanists with the invention of printing but at the same time flourished in occult and magical form among the followers of the Hermetic tradition; Art of Memory, pp. xii, 368.

[^19]: 19. See Ioan P. Couliano, Eros and Magic in the Renaissance (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987), chap. 9, esp. p. 193.

[^20]: 20. See “Mémoire (Métaphysique)” in Encyclopédie, ou dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers, ed. Denis Diderot and Jean Le Rond d’Alembert, 17 vols. (Paris, 1751–65), 10: 326–28. The first line of the article, developed in every one of its subsequent paragraphs, reads: “Il est important de bien distinguer le point qui sépare l’imagination de la mémoire” (italics in the original).

[^21]: 21. This entire paragraph and the previous one, beginning with the discussion of Aristotle, rely on Yates, Art of Memory; see pp. 32–33, 71, 155–57, 202, 224, 230, 241, 372–73.

[^22]: 22. Condillac, Essai in Oeuvres philosophiques, 1: 15.

[^23]: 23. Ibid., pp. 15–16, 19–22.

[^24]: 24. Ibid., pp. 27–30.

[^25]: 25. Ibid., pp. 30–31.

[^26]: 26. Nicolas Malebranche, De la recherche de la vérité (1674), ed. Francisque Bouillier, 2 vols. (Paris: Garnier, [1880]), 1: 136–37.

[^27]: 27. Ibid., pp. 164–83. As late as 1802, the physician-philosopher P.-J.-G. Cabanis refused either to affirm or deny the belief and asserted that there was much empirical evidence in support of it; see his Rapports du physique et du morale de l’homme in Oeuvres philosophiques de Cabanis, ed. Claude Lehec and Jean Cazeneuve, 2 vols. (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1956), 1: 605. For a study of this theme from the Renaissance to the Romantic period, see Marie-Hélène Huet, Monstrous Imagination (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993) The medical belief in at least an indirect power of imagination on the fetus persisted into the nineteenth century; see the subsequent expansion and reprinting by one physician of his 1807 memoir, J.-B. Demangeon, De l’imagination considérée dans ses effets directs sur l’homme et les animaux et dans ses effets indirects sur les produits de la gestation, 2d ed. (Paris: Rouen frères, 1829), and, under an altered title, Du Pouvoir de l’imagination sur le physique et le moral de l’homme, new ed. (Paris: De Just Rouvier et E. Le Bouvier, 1834).

[^28]: 28. Malebranche, De la recherche de la vérité, 1: bk. 2, pt. 3, pp. 233–80.

[^29]: 29. “Imagination,” Encyclopédie, 8: 560–63, esp. 561.

[^30]: 30. “Songe,” Encyclopédie, 15: 354–57, esp. 355. The article was drawn from Formey, Mélanges philosophiques, 2 vols. (Leyden: Impr. d’E. Luzac fils, 1754), 1: 174–204, esp. 180.

[^31]: 31. Formey, Principes de morale, déduits de l’usage des facultés de l’entendement humain, 2 vols. (Leyden: Durand, 1762), 1: 131. The word in the text is “courtier” but the references in the passage to fields and bridles, as well as the fact that coursier fougueux is a standard locution of the period, suggest a typographical error or an eighteenth-century variant on the modern spelling.

[^32]: 32. See Paul Robert, Dictionnaire alphabétique et analogique de la langue française, 6 vols. (Paris: Société du Nouveau Littré, 1965), 3: 127.

[^33]: 33. These linguistic clusters demonstrated a remarkable staying power. In late nineteenth-century French psychiatry, the propensity to embark upon purposeless fugues was theorized as a traveling neurosis, and one to which Jews, by definition deracinated, were especially susceptible. See Jan Goldstein, “The Wandering Jew and the Problem of Psychiatric Anti-Semitism in Fin-de-Siècle France,” Journal of Contemporary History 20 (1985): 521–52.

[^34]: 34. Formey, Principes de morale, loc. cit.

[^35]: 35. Ibid.

[^36]: 36. La Fontaine’s Fable de la laitière et le pot au lait, which Collin D’Harleville used as the epigraph for his play Les Châteaux en Espagne, begins with the couplet, “Quel esprit ne bat pas la campagne?/Qui ne fait châteaux en Espagne?”

[^37]: 37. “Remontrances sur l’édit supprimant les jurandes et les communautés d’arts et métiers,” 2–4 March 1776, in Remontrances du Parlement de Paris au XVIIIe siècle, ed. Jules Flammermont, 3 vols. (Paris: Impr. nationale, 1888–98), 3: 309–10.

[^38]: 38. “Lit de justice pour l’enregistrement de l’édit . . . supprimant les jurandes,” 12 March 1776, in ibid., p. 346.

[^39]: 39. Jürgen Habermas, The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a Category of Bourgeois Society, trans. Thomas Burger (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989), p. 29 for the quotation and pp. 28– 29, 43–51.

[^40]: 40. “Observations des maîtres-gantiers,” B.N. Manuscripts, Collection Joly de Fleury (henceforth, BN MSS, Coll. Joly), vol. 596, fol. 114.

[^41]: 41. The term “existence” may also have a material, economic meaning in this text; but that is not the meaning the glovemakers highlight. Instead, existence as “knowability” and as “subjectivity” are given primacy; and insofar as it appears at all, the economic meaning—the ability to earn a livelihood—flows from those “existential” attributes. For a very similar use of the term in the context of a post-Napoleonic call to restore the guilds, see Louis-Pierre De Seine, Mémoire sur la nécessité du rétablissement des maîtrises et des corporations comme moyens d’encourager l’industrie et le commerce (Paris: Impr. de Fain, 1815), p. 9: “What does one see in Paris and through all of France? Men whom nobody knows, who have no existence (aucune existence) in society, and who nonetheless open commercial establishments.”

[^42]: 42. Réflexions des maîtres tailleurs de Paris, printed brochure dated 17 February 1776, p. 3, in BN MSS, Coll. Joly, vol. 462, fol. 173(1).

[^43]: 43. See “Mémoire pour la communauté des maîtres boulangers,” handwritten, n.d., BN MSS, Coll. Joly, vol. 462, fol. 105v; and “Observations . . . des Maîtres blondiniers, boutonniers de Paris, handwritten, BN MSS, Coll. Joly, vol. 462, fol. 108; “A nosseigneurs de Parlement par le gardes visiteurs actuels du corps des horlogers,” BN MSS, Coll. Joly, vol. 462, fol. 125.

[^44]: 44. Réflexions sur l’édit concernant la suppression des jurandes par les maîtres et marchands tissutiers-rubanniers et frangers, printed brochure dated 21 February 1776, p. 8 in BN MSS, Coll. Joly, vol. 596, fol. 98(3).

[^45]: 45. “A nosseigneurs du Parlement par les maîtres savetiers,” BN MSS, Coll. Joly, vol. 462, fol. 148. Conversely, critics of the trade corporations vilified the gaze of the jurés. An anonymous and undated “Mémoire sur les communités d’arts et métiers,” apparently written in the early 1770s, described that gaze as an “inhuman and revolting inquisition” which “ceaselessly violates the interior of the establishment.” BN MSS, Coll. Joly, vol. 1729, fol. 141.

[^46]: 46. Réflexions des six corps de la ville de Paris sur la suppression des jurandes, BN MSS, Coll. Joly, vol. 462, pp. 12–14 (fols. 155/1–155/2), my italics. The six-corps were the drapers, grocers, mercers, furriers, hosiers, and goldsmiths engaged in large-scale, long-distance commerce.

[^47]: 47. “Mémoire pour la communauté des maîtres boulangers,” fols. 106–7, my italics.

[^48]: 48. Bibliothèque municipale de Besançon, Fonds de l’Académie de Besançon, vol. 12, fol. 202. My thanks to Cynthia Koepp for supplying me with this citation.

[^49]: 49. I learned of the Bonafon affair, and of the prominence of the category of “imagination” in the police interrogation of the accused, in Lisa Jane Graham, If the King Only Knew: Seditious Speech in the Reign of Louis XV (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2000), chap. 2, esp. 68–69. I subsequently consulted the original sources; see Archives de la Bastille 11582, Premier Interrogatoire fait . . . à la Dlle Bonnafons, 29 August 1745, fols. 55v, 56v, 57; and Second Interrogatoire, 4 September 1745, fol. 80v. My interpretation follows Graham’s.

[^50]: 50. I am grateful to Ken Alder for calling this example to my attention. Alder includes a discussion of the school and its founder in his Engineering the Revolution: Arms and Enlightenment in France, 1763–1815 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997), pp. 143–46.

[^51]: 51. Arthur Birembaut, “Les écoles gratuites du dessin,” in Enseignement et diffusion des sciences en France au 18e siècle, ed. René Taton (Paris: Hermann, 1986), pp. 441–76, esp. 445.

[^52]: 52. [Bachelier], Discours sur l’utilité des écoles élémentaires en faveur des arts mécaniques: Prononcé par M. B*** à l’ouverture de l’école royale gratuite de dessin, le 10 septembre 1766 (Paris: Impr. nationale executive du Louvre, 1792), p. 6.

[^53]: 53. Barnabé-Farmian de Rosoi, Essai philosophique sur l’établissemen des écoles gratuites de dessin pour les arts mécaniques (Paris: Impr. de Quillau, 1769), pp. 63–64, esp. 75–76.

[^54]: 54. The earliest listing of the Ecole in the Almanach royale, that of 1769, notes that the bureau overseeing the operations of the school includes a “Rector of Studies for Geometry” (p. 547).

[^55]: 55. See [Bachelier], Mémoire concernant l’Ecole gratuite de dessin (Paris: Impr. royale, 1774), esp. pp. 28–31 and the copy of the admission certificate opposite p. 38.

[^56]: 56. See J. G. A. Pocock, The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic Republican Tradition (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1975), esp. pp. 450–51, 453–54, 459, 466; and “The Mobility of Property and the Rise of Eighteenth-Century Sociology” in Virtue, Commerce, and History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), esp. pp. 110–13.

[^57]: 57. “Remontrances sur l’édit supprimant les jurandes,” in Remontrances du Parlement de Paris, 3: 296.

[^58]: 58. John Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, ed. Peter H. Nidditch (Oxford: Clarendon, 1975), bk. 2, chap. 11, para. 13, p. 161.

[^59]: 59. London: J. Roberts, 1721. I learned of this title from a footnote in Roy Porter, “The Rage of Party: A Glorious Revolution in English Psychiatry?” Medical History 27 (1983): 35–50. The pamphlet is in the Goldsmiths’-Kress collection, which I consulted on microfilm.

[^60]: 60. Midriff, Observations, pp. 1–2, 19–20.

[^61]: 61. For this description of Law’s system, I am relying heavily on a modern economist’s account, Peter M. Garber, “Famous First Bubbles,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 4 (Spring 1990): 35–53, esp. 41–42.

[^62]: 62. On this point, see Thomas E. Kaiser, “Public Credit: John Law’s Scheme and the Question of Confiance,” Proceedings of the Western Society for French History 16 (1989): 72–81.

[^63]: 63. For adherents to bullionism, écus, the standard denomination of specie, were infinitely preferable on notes to livres, the fictitious money of account in which prices were legally stated. A note holder had the assurance that a note in écus could be exchanged for a fixed and exact quantity of specie. See Thomas E. Kaiser, “Money, Despotism and Public Opinion in Early Eighteenth-Century France: John Law and the Debate on Royal Credit,” Journal of Modern History 63 (1991): 1–28, esp. 10.

[^64]: 64. “Remontrances sur l’affaire de la refonte des monnaies,” 27 June 1718, in Remontrances du Parlement de Paris, 1: 83. My account here relies heavily on Kaiser, “Money, Despotism, and Public Opinion.”

[^65]: 65. Quoted in Kaiser, “Money, Despotism, and Public Opinion,” p. 12, from a source in the Archives Nationales, Paris.

[^66]: 66. Le secret du système de M. Law dévoilé. En deux lettres écrites par un duc pair de France et un mylord anglois (The Hague, 1721), pp. 13–14, 26, 29, my italics.

[^67]: 67. The “Fragment of an Ancient Mythologist” is part of Letter 142; see Charles de Secondat, baron de Montesquieu, Lettres persanes (Paris: Garnier, 1960), pp. 307–10. I have in general followed the translation of J. Robert Loy, Montesquieu, The Persian Letters (Cleveland: Meridian, 1961), pp. 258–59.

[^68]: 68. “Idée générale du nouveau système des finances” (1719 or 1720) in John Law, Oeuvres complètes, 3 vols. (Paris: Sirey, 1934), 3: 75–97, esp. 84–86.

[^69]: 69. See Lettres sur le nouveau système des finances (n.p., 1720), which the catalog of the Bibliothèque Nationale de France ascribes to the abbé Terrasson. Each of the three letters is separately paginated; the quotations come from the second letter, dated 11 March 1720, pp. 13–14, 30–32, my italics.

[^70]: 70. On the disette d’argent, see Thomas M. Luckett, “Credit and Commercial Society in France, 1740–1789” (Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, 1992), and “‘There is No Money Here’: Money Famine and Tax Revolt in Early Modern France,” in Money: Lure, Lore and Literature, ed. J. L. Di Gaetani (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994), pp. 77–85.

[^71]: 71. Michel Foucault, The History of Sexuality, vol. 1: An Introduction, trans. Robert Hurley (New York: Vintage, 1980), p. 104. On the anonymous Onania and the Onanisme of Dr. Tissot, see Théodore Tarczylo, Sexe et liberté au siècle des lumières (Paris: Presses de la Renaissance, 1983) and Antoinette Emch-Dériaz, Tissot, Physician of the Enlightenment (New York: Peter Lang, 1992).

[^72]: 72. See Thomas W. Laqueur, Solitary Sex: A Cultural History of Masturbation (New York: Zone Books, 2003), esp. pp. 210–22, 317–20. For more on the joint theme of masturbation and the imagination, see Vernon A. Rosario II, “Phantastical Pollutions: The Public Threat of Private Vice in France,” in Solitary Pleasures: The Historical, Literary and Artistic Discourses of Auto-Eroticism, ed. Paula Bennett and Vernon Rosario II (New York: Routledge, 1995), pp. 101–30.

[^73]: 73. Rousseau, The Confessions, trans. J. M. Cohen (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1963), p. 26, my italics; for the original French see Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Oeuvres complètes, ed. Bernard Gagnebin and Marcel Raymond, 4 vols. (Paris: Gallimard/Pléiade, 1959–1969), 1: 16.

[^74]: 74. Rousseau, Confessions, Eng. ed., pp. 108–9; French ed., pp. 108–9.

[^75]: 75. See Philippe Lejeune, “Le ‘dangereux supplément’: lecture d’un aveu de Rousseau,” Annales E.S.C. 29 (1974): 1009–22, esp. 1020; the exchange of letters took place in 1762.

[^76]: 76. Jaucourt “Roman,” Encyclopédie, vol. 14: 341–42, quotation from p. 341.

[^77]: 77. Pierre-Daniel Huet, Traité de l’origine des romans (1670) (Paris: N.-L.-M. Desessarts, Year VII), pp. 109–10. On Huet’s anti-Cartesianism, see Nicholas Jolley, “The Reception of Descartes’ Philosophy,” in The Cambridge Companion to Descartes, ed. John Cottingham (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), pp. 393–423, esp. p. 409.

[^78]: 78. Nicolas Lenglet du Fresnoy, De l’usage des romans (Amsterdam: De Poilras, 1734), pp. 2–3.

[^79]: 79. Armand-Pierre Jacquin, Entretiens sur les romans (Paris: Duchesne, 1755), pp. 128–29.

[^80]: 80. On these two originary versions of French literary history—the one excluding and the other admitting women novelists into the canon—see Joan DeJean, Tender Geographies: Women and the Origins of the Novel in France (New York: Columbia University Press, 1991), chap. 5. DeJean does not, however, note the corresponding positions of the two camps on the issue of imagination.

[^81]: 81. This thesis is put forth in Rolf Engelsing, Der Bürger als Leser: Lesergeschichte in Deutschland, 1500–1800 (Stuttgart, 1974). For critical commentary on it, see Robert Darnton, The Great Cat Massacre and Other Episodes in French Cultural History (New York: Basic Books, 1984), pp. 249–51; Roger Chartier, Lectures et lecteurs dans la France d’Ancien Régime (Paris: Seuil, 1987), pp. 201–3; and James Smith Allen, In the Public Eye: A History of Reading in Modern France, 1800–1940 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991), p. 17.

[^82]: 82. Archives de la Bastille 11582, Premier interrogatoire, fols. 55 and 55v.

[^83]: 83. See Chartier, Lectures et lecteurs, pp. 199–200.

[^84]: 84. Rousseau, Confessions, Eng. ed., p. 48; French ed., p. 41.

[^85]: 85. Michael Fried, Absorption and Theatricality: Painting and Beholder in the Age of Diderot (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980), chap. 1.

[^86]: 86. Rapport des commissaires chargés par le roi de l’examen du magnétisme animal (n.p., 1784), pp. 39–42, 46, quotation on p. 39. See also my discussion of the Rapport in Jan Goldstein, “‘Moral Contagion’: A Professional Ideology of Medicine and Psychiatry in Eighteenth- and Nineteenth-Century France,” in Professions and the French State, 1700–1900, ed. Gerald L. Geison (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1984), pp. 181–222.
