## 2 The Revolutionary Schooling of Imagination

What happened to the anxiety about the freestanding individual—an anxiety for which the discourse on imagination typically served as proxy—during the Revolution itself? Or, put differently, how could the Revolutionaries have confidently embarked upon such policies as the abolition of the craft guilds in 1791 and the abolition of a host of other corporate bodies on the night of August 4, 1789, if they believed that only a fully elaborated social matrix could contain the potentially unruly imaginations of the populace? Within a smaller compass, the oeuvre of Condillac poses much the same question. How could the master of sensationalist psychology, whose Essai sur les origines des connaissances humaines (1746) trenchantly analyzed the dangers presented to imagination by solitude, have unequivocally championed the laissez-faire market in his Le commerce et le gouvernement considérés relativement l’un à l’autre (1776)?

A basic, skeletal answer to these parallel questions—to be fleshed out later in this chapter—can be found in a short text from the republican phase of the Revolution: an anonymous journalistic account of the Festival of Reason held in the capital in the Year II (1793). Designed as a politically acceptable alternative to Catholic or, indeed, any sectarian religious worship, the Festival of Reason was celebrated in a specially constructed temple whose portal bore the inscription “To Philosophy.” It culminated in the emergence from the temple of the figure of Liberty, “represented by a beautiful woman . . . a living woman and not a statue.”[^1] The overt aim of the article in Révolutions de Paris was to paint this particular festival, and the Revolutionary cult of the Supreme Being generally, in the most laudatory colors; the author was not explicitly concerned with the issue of imagination. Yet he employed the word “imagination” with notable frequency, unwittingly informing us about the new Revolutionary dispensation with respect to that mental faculty.

The article begins with a condemnation of all clerical institutions and casts a wistful eye at the United States, which has never known an established church or a powerful, entrenched priesthood. Going on to blame the Catholic Church for all the setbacks that the Revolution has endured, especially the counterrevolutionary insurgency in the Midi and the Vendée, it carefully specifies the manner in which the priests carried out their sabotage. Theirs was a psychological technique. In those regions that eventually turned against the Revolution, the priests had “directed as they pleased the vagabond imagination of the people.”[^2] Noteworthy for its familiar ring, the phrase “vagabond imagination” offers yet another variant on the metaphor that we encountered in Old Regime discourse: imagination as unstable drifter, or “wandering Jew,” or coursier fougueux. If wily priests in the South and West had gained control over their parishioners’ labile imaginations in order to inculcate a counterrevolutionary politics, it follows logically that in the name of survival the Revolution must exert its own set of controls over that pivotal mental faculty.

The author initially credits the French people with having in 1789 “shaken off the yoke of superstition spontaneously, by the sole impetus of wisdom and reason.” But he recognizes that the Revolution cannot rely indefinitely on this glorious and unplanned moment of lucidity that was its point of origin. Instead, the Revolutionaries must hasten to develop a technique that will durably imprint the imaginations of the citizenry in a rationalist direction. The choice of a “living woman and not a statue” to represent the principle of Liberty in the Festival of Reason turns out to be a salient example of such a technique. According to the author, the festival organizers “wanted from the very first moment to break the people’s minds of all habit of idolatry.” Ever vigilant, they recognized that a stone emblem of Liberty would permit the maintenance of the fundamental belief structure of Catholicism, encouraging the simple replacement of “an inanimate simulacrum of liberty” for “the holy sacrament.” A living woman would, on the other hand, help the people to resist that ingrained mental habit; as flesh and blood, she could not be so readily “deified by the ignorant.” Rejecting the use of a statue, then, constituted the deliberate adoption for political ends of a kind of psychological pedagogy or collective mental hygiene. As the author puts it, care had been taken by the Revolutionary leadership to refrain from presenting to the people “objects that could lead their imagination astray.”[^3]

The Révolutions de Paris article can thus be read as a capsule history of sensationalist psychology with respect to the eighteenth-century understanding of imagination. Initially, as Chapter 1 of this book has shown, sensationalist psychology gave a particularly sharp edge to concern about the imagination. By identifying the environmental circumstances likely to conduce to disorders of the imagination, it heightened the psychological threat posed by certain social, economic, and cultural changes. But as this text from the Year II suggests, sensationalist psychology also provided contemporaries with a solution to the very problem whose contours it had earlier revealed. If, after all, learned men knew enough about the workings of imagination to pinpoint the situations likely to arouse that faculty and overstimulate it to a dangerous degree, then they could also figure out how to enlist countervailing forces to keep imagination in check. Once properly construed, scientific knowledge of the mind transformed an inchoate and somewhat mysterious problem of imagination into a concrete problem of psychological engineering.

The relative accent on science is critical here. The scientific credentials of sensationalist psychology remained more or less in the background when, under the Old Regime, commentators relied on that theory to flag the social circumstances that unduly excited imagination. But once, under the pressure of the Revolutionary moment, the same theory was put to use to stabilize imagination and, by extension, the individual psyche in the new noncorporate order, its scientific status tended to be emphasized. In the absence of traditional sources of social and political authority, the authority attributable to science increased. Psychological science became a precious sociopolitical resource.

After 1789, in other words, the changes associated with the emergence of modern economic forms could be safely carried out as long as scientifically inflected reason could find, or invent, substitutes for the restraints on imagination formerly exercised by the corporate bodies. Indeed, as this chapter will argue, much of what goes under the name of Revolutionary political culture was predicated on the tenets of sensationalist psychology and entailed the creation of just such substitutive restraints.

In order to understand how the discourse on imagination arrived at this happy point of locating the solution to a thorny problem within the problem itself, we need to return to an area broached in Chapter 1: the assignment (and reassignment) of words to things, and its perceived relationship to the putative sway of imagination over human affairs.

### Renovated Sign Systems, or the Epistemology of Imagination

As suggested in Chapter 1, eighteenth-century critics of economic reorganization tended to point accusingly at the innovative vocabulary employed by their opponents. They regarded such vocabulary as codifying and tacitly granting legitimacy to the imaginative distortions introduced into human affairs by such economic changes as the expansion of credit or the dismantling of market regulations. One such early allegation of misleading vocabulary has already been cited: the complaint made by the parlementaires during the John Law episode about the use of the term “value” to refer to paper currency not backed by its equivalent in precious metal. Some decades later, however, more powerful critiques of this sort were generated, critiques that took as their target not a discrete linguistic maneuver but rather the whole science of political economy viewed as a thoroughly renovated, interlocking sign system for the re-presentation of the economy. The mid-century debate over Quesnay’s Physiocratic theory provides a good example of this concern about comprehensive neologism[^4] and its effects.

Quesnay depicted both sides of that debate in his Dialogues sur le commerce et sur les travaux des artisans (1757). The controversy rehearsed in these Dialogues turned on Quesnay’s basic categories—that is, his tripartite division of society into a so-called productive class, a class of proprietors, and a sterile class. Physiocracy ascribed “real” productivity only to the soil and to the practitioners of agricultural occupations. Hence merchants, entrepreneurs, and artisans all found themselves tagged as economically “sterile.” Many of them expressed “surprise” and “anger” at this “insulting denomination.”[^5]

Quesnay’s Dialogues thus took up for discussion the novel alteration in the relationship between words and things allegedly effected by Physiocratic science. Defending commerce against invidious Physiocratic labeling, Monsieur H. argued that, especially under conditions of laissez-faire, mercantile labor “procured” even if it did not exactly “produce” profit and hence did not qualify as “sterile.” The Physiocratic Monsieur N. replied that his interlocutor confounded the mere “absence of loss” in commercial transactions with “real product.” In any case, Quesnay’s own position (expressed in the prefatory remarks) was that the word “sterile,” as he employed it, should not be construed as an affront. It was instead a rigorous scientific term and, as such, was utterly irrelevant to issues of “dignity” or social esteem.[^6]

In the next dialogue, Monsieur H. became the spokesman of the maligned artisan, complaining that Physiocratic terminology “made [artisanal] production disappear.” The unflappable Monsieur N. argued against that charge in part by expatiating on the relation between abstract scientific languages and ordinary languages. Since, he contended, “everything is intermixed in Nature and travels in crisscrossing circular paths,” we can properly distinguish natural objects “only by means of abstract ideas, which neither arrange nor disturb anything in the physical world.” These abstractions characterize relationships between such objects solely in terms of their causes and effects, speculatively teasing out a particular relationship from the jumble of physical phenomena. Thus the abstract idea of productivity that formed the basis of the Physiocratic social taxonomy was, in Monsieur N.’s formulation, “so narrowed in its physical sense, so rigorously reduced to reality,” that it no longer conformed to “the vague expressions used in ordinary language.” And rightly so. For “it is not for the natural order to conform itself to ordinary language, which conveys only confused and equivocal ideas; it is rather for [scientific] expressions to conform themselves to an exact knowledge of the natural order” by making “distinctions rigorously subjected to reality.” Whether Monsieur H., or Quesnay’s readers, followed the subtle reasoning of this disquisition, which hinged on the putatively superior ontological status of what the Physiocrats called the natural order, is unclear. But Monsieur N. nonetheless concluded it by casting himself in the role of the magnanimous protector of Monsieur H., admonishing his vulnerable interlocutor “to be on guard against the dominant illusion into which vulgar modes of expression have thrown you.”[^7]

The issue of the relationships between words and things, of the renaming inherent in new scientific conceptualizations, transported the problem of imagination and imaginative distortion, which Chapter 1 examined in terms of psychological integrity, onto the level of epistemology. Was affixing the label “sterile” to the work of artisans a praiseworthy act of scientific clarification, as Monsieur N. contended? Or, as Monsieur H. insinuated, was it a kind of magician’s trick, an attempt to dupe the public by playing on the imagination and causing the concrete products of manual labor simply to “disappear”? In a paradoxical conjuncture, the same renaming of artisanal production was regarded as the height of irrationality and distortion by one camp and the height of rationality and lucid thinking by the other.

The allegation that Physiocratic theory was a deceitful product of imagination formed the central trope of Les mannequins, a pamphlet in the style of Montesquieu’s Persian Letters that circulated in manuscript in 1776, at the end of the brief period of the Turgot reforms. Nominally set in “Persia,” a country whose political situation just happened to mirror exactly that of France at the death of Louis XV, the pamphlet used its thin veil of exoticism to suggest how the Physiocrat Turgot (here, Togur) obtained the office of Comptroller-General in the first place. The story was as follows: While in a quandary over the choice a new Comptroller-General, Louis XVI’s elderly chief adviser Maurepas (here, Alibey) dozed off. An evil genius bent on weakening the Persian state then “wrap[ped] himself in the artifice of a dream” and, thus disguised, “seize[d] the imagination of the sleeper,” presenting to it a strange mechanical contraption in the form of a man. This anthropomorphic machine was bedecked in ordinances and edicts. It had for a head an active volcano discharging “gold, wheat, commodities of all sorts”; released into the open air, these commodities hurled themselves from the center to the circumference and back again. In the place of ears were two large canals exuding a viscous fluid that, upon condensation, formed the words of the key texts of Physiocracy. At the rim of the canals stood a half-dozen workers occupied with the task of keeping the volcano “effervescent,” and at the base of the contraption a multitude of voices repeated incessantly the words, “Equality, liberty, net product.”[^8]

Clearly, the reader of the pamphlet was meant to identify the machine as the Physiocratic program, put into effect by an absolute ruler (hence the outer layer of edicts and ordinances), liberating goods onto the open market and keeping them in perpetual circulation, fully equipped with its slogans and its fundamental texts. “Astonished” by the mannequin, Alibey initially dismisses it as utterly unsuitable for Persia. But upon awakening, he cannot rid his consciousness of the dream image, and eventually he calls upon Togur, installing him in the office of Comptroller-General expressly to implement the economic policy emblematized by the mannequin. Alibey’s imagination has been imprinted by the sight of the anthropomorphic machine, “struck (frappé) by this spectacle,” and he in turn mechanically carries out its bidding. The way in which he has been won over to Physiocracy—against his better judgment and through the insidious capture of his imagination—makes especially appropriate the generalizing comment of his wife: “Don’t you know that everyone is, after a fashion, a mannequin?”[^9] In other words, we all have psyches capable of operating on mechanical principles outside our voluntary control, and hence we are all prone to manipulation by means of the faculty of imagination. Insofar as Physiocracy makes a convincing appeal, the pamphleteer would have the reader believe, it addresses the passive and impressionable imagination, not the faculty of reason.

### The Well-Made Language of Science

Against the background of these polemics, we are better able to understand the internal logic of Condillac’s oeuvre: the reasoning by which the anatomist of the psyche who feared imagination’s power over solitary, novel-reading women could nonetheless champion the abolition of the guilds and express no anxiety about the resulting solitude of the artisan. Condillac came to the study of political economy late in his career, decades after he had hammered out the principles of his sensationalist psychology. He published Le commerce et le gouvernement hurriedly in 1776, spurred on by (accurate) rumors of the imminent fall of Turgot, whose high position had protected advocacy of laissez-faire from censorship.[^10] Solidly within the Physiocractic mainstream in most respects, Condillac’s treatise depicted the corporations both as a detrimental tax on industry (due to the payments the corporations were required to make to the Crown to assure their legal existence and to the costs of litigation between corporations over their respective spheres of monopoly) and as an “iniquitous” privilege which made it difficult for the excluded to earn a comfortable living and even “reduc[ed some] to mendicity.”[^11]

In arguing that artisans be released from the corporate structure, Condillac thus made no explicit connection between his psychological theory and his political economy, at least at the level of the mental apparatus imputed to the economic actor. In fact, and oddly enough for a thinker once so intensely occupied with the problem of psychological functioning, he never even highlighted the mental apparatus of the individual as an important issue for economic science—in stark contrast to his contemporary Adam Smith, whose Wealth of Nations, published the same year, conspicuously posited the pursuit of self-interest as the motive driving homo economicus. Instead, Condillac forged the connection between the components of his oeuvre at the level of methodology. Both his psychology and his political economy rested on the principle that a science is a “well-made language,” one that is begun afresh, weeding out vague locutions and (often by means of neologism) precisely matching signs to their signifieds.

Condillac gave canonical expression to this principle in his last works, the Logique, published posthumously in 1780, and the Langue des calculs, not published until 1798.[^12] But it is, with hindsight, fair to say that the principle already existed in germ and, perhaps in everything but name, in his psychological treatises of the 1740s and 1750s. Undertaking in these early works to decompose the human mind into its various operations and to explain its generation of ideas, he had stipulated that thought could proceed only by means of language, or the affixing of signs to sensory impressions.[^13] Condillac’s psychology was thus both the first instance of a well-made language in his oeuvre and the very grounding of that concept and of all its subsequent instances. In Le commerce et le gouvernement he came closer than before to articulating the well-made language formula. A footnote added after 1776 told his readers that his purpose in writing the treatise was not so much to add discrete new insights to political economy as to supply that entire science, often regarded by the public as an “indecipherable code,” with the “particular language” that it, like all particular sciences, required.[^14]

These epistemological principles shed important light on Condillac’s assessment of the status of imagination under laissez-faire, but they do so only after we have painstakingly traced out the twists and turns of Condillac’s argument. For while Le commerce et le gouvernement frustrates our inquiry by its failure to ponder the psychodynamics of the artisan, incorporated or otherwise, the Logique does address the issue of imagination on a theoretical plane in the course of specifying just what the laconic formula of science-as-well-made-language entailed. Condillac writes:

> The art of reasoning reduces itself to a well-made language only because the order of our ideas is itself nothing more than the hierarchy established between the names given to genuses and to species; and since we have new ideas only because we form new classifications, it is evident that we determine those ideas only insofar as we determine the classifications themselves.[^15]

Knowledge, then, is a system of classifying things. That system, Condillac continues, articulating with greater clarity the point made by Quesnay in his 1757 Dialogues, does not exist in nature itself. Rather the various genuses and species indispensable to our efforts to acquire knowledge reflect the “relations that [things] have to us and that they have between themselves.” Such categories are artifacts of purposive human thought, and it is precisely the recognition of their human origins that induces in us what is for Condillac the appropriate stance of epistemological modesty:

> If we perceive that these classifications are necessary to us only because, in order to make our ideas distinct, we must decompose the objects that we wish to study, we will not only recognize the limitations of our mind but will recognize the boundaries that we would not contemplate crossing. We will not get lost in futile questions. Instead of seeking what we cannot find, we will find what is within our grasp. For that purpose we need only construct exact ideas—something we can always do when we know how to use words.[^16]

It is at this juncture that Condillac inserts into his argument a disquisition on the topic of imagination, considering its relation to the sought-after well-made language and evincing once again the preoccupation of his era with that particular mental faculty. He contends that the act of analysis, of decomposing the things we have experienced into their component sensations in order to label them appropriately, endows human beings with the capacity “to create the arts and sciences.” Or “better still,” as he refines and strengthens this position, analysis “itself created them” directly and “we have had only to follow it.” How misguided, then, is the standard attribution of such creative powers to imagination! “Imagination,” Condillac asserts, “would be nothing without analysis.” After delivering this harsh assessment, he decides to make it more demeaning still. Imagination without analysis would not be merely a neutral lack or void but an active detriment, “a source of opinions, prejudices, errors.” In the absence of the regulation provided by analysis, imagination would lead us to produce nothing but “extravagant dreams”—as do, in fact, those “writers who rely solely on imagination.”[^17] Condillac has, in effect, rewritten Voltaire’s distinction, discussed in Chapter 1, between (bad) passive imagination and (good) active imagination, identifying the positive features of the latter as the contribution of analysis.

Continuing to pursue this theme of the opposition between analysis and imagination, Condillac locates what is for him the crux of the matter: the provenance ascribed to so-called “abstract ideas,” which presumably include the classifications used to organize things into genera and species. Because abstract ideas “elude the senses” and appear to have nothing in common with sensory data, people can easily surmise that they come from somewhere other than the senses—for example, that they have an independent existence in our soul as innate ideas, or that they exist only in the mind of God. Seriously entertaining such propositions, says Condillac, “will necessarily lead us away from the path to discovery,” dooming us to wander endlessly “from error to error.” For it is precisely the conviction that abstract ideas originate outside human sensation that consigns us irrevocably to the realm of imagination: “Such are the systems that imagination produces: once we have adopted them, it is no longer possible to have a well-made language; and we are condemned almost always to reason badly because we reason badly about our mental faculties.”[^18]

Condillac’s insistence that a reasonable person hold fast to the ultimately sensory origins of abstract ideas is strikingly similar to the anthropocentric requirement of the organizers of the Festival of Reason in the Year II—that is, their insistence that abstract ideas not be deified but be seen in purely human terms, that any other conception of abstract ideas marks the person holding it as under the baneful sway of imagination. As the author of the Révolutions de Paris article put it: “There is one thing that we must never weary of telling the people: liberty, reason, truth are abstract entities. They are not gods, for properly speaking, they are parts of ourselves.”[^19] The marked similarity between Condillac and the festival organizers is hardly accidental, for as this chapter will go on to show, Condillac in many ways presided posthumously over the Revolutionary festivals.

An extrapolation from the Logique to Le commerce et le gouvernement offers a plausible solution—though, to be sure, one never spelled out by Condillac himself—both to the problem of the artisan’s imagination under laissez-faire and to its corollary, the problem of stabilizing the atomized individual. It is clear that for Condillac the overhauling of terminology is anything but a conjuring trick or an effort to seduce the public by confounding the real and the imaginary. It is rather the supremely rational gesture, the laying down of the foundations of science, the definitive banishment of the deceits and beguilements of imagination. In Condillac’s lexicon, imagination and a well-made language are radically opposed entities, and important consequences would seem to flow from that relationship. The unincorporated artisan in the laissez-faire market will, we can surmise, work within a thoroughly rational economic structure, one that operationalizes the well-made language of political economy; and hence in that new environment, by definition inimical to imagination, the artisan’s solitude will harbor no psychic dangers. (In the absence of such a considered scientific rationale, on the other hand, Condillac would probably not countenance the release of the artisan from the corporation. For let loose into a society at once socially unstructured and intellectually unenlightened, the imagination of the solitary artisan would encounter no countervailing force and would thus continue to pose genuine threats.) Even without the benefit of a dense customary routine regulating the artisan’s daily activities, the pure rational transparency of a social situation created according to a scientific blueprint will effectively constrain imagination; in this regard, science-as-well-made language will replace the corporate structure.

The criteria for a well-made language were not, of course, as perspicuous as Condillac seemed to assume. Take the reception of Le commerce et le gouvernement. Members of the Physiocratic community, sympathetic to Condillac’s basic position on the freedom of the market, nonetheless bristled at the terminological pretensions of this relative newcomer to their fold. Both Guillaume François Le Trosne and the self-identified Physiocrat, the abbé Nicolas Baudeau, for example, questioned Condillac’s division of society into two classes (landed proprietors and wage earners), firmly convinced that the tripartite division initially laid down by Quesnay (landed proprietors, cultivators, and wage earners) accurately translated reality. As Le Trosne put it, Quesnay’s categories corresponded, quite simply, to “what goes on right beneath our eyes.” The founder of the discipline had, after all, “taken great pains to fix the meaning of words properly.”[^20]

Quarrels such as these underscore the vast, uncharted territory opened up by the eighteenth-century mandate to use neologism in the service of science. Was anything possible in the well-making of languages, or should specific guidelines be applied? What was the court of last resort when new terminologies conflicted? An astute observer of the scientific and philosophical scene like Condorcet quickly recognized the problem that issued from Condillac’s formula. Brooding on it in writings of the 1770s and 1780s, he reached the conclusion that all classificatory systems interpreted nature rather than merely transcribing it; hence, none could ever be definitive. Even the ones that fostered scientific progress at a given moment introduced obstacles into the process of observation that would eventually erode their utility. Yet however imperfect, classificatory systems were all that we had in our effort to gain accurate knowledge of the world. Or, in Condorcet’s phrase, “If there is little philosophy in mistaking these methodological arrangements for science itself, there is still less in despising them.”[^21]

Condorcet’s sophistication on this issue was, however, rare in his era. Most people who regarded themselves as enlightened knew only that the specially constructed languages of science were a hallmark of enlightenment, that they were far more reliable than ordinary language, and that they could serve as levers for intellectual and perhaps social change. The basic lines of intellectual battle were drawn not over the status of rival classificatory schemes but between the supporters of the new well-made languages on the one hand and the supporters of the traditional terminology (and practices) of corporate society on the other.

These two camps represented alternate epistemologies, although only the advocates of science proffered an epistemology in the conventional sense—that is, a set of explicit claims about the nature and scope of knowledge rooted in an explicit model of the human mind. For the traditionalists, a particular social structure was, in effect if not in name, epistemologically foundational and, like a model of the mind, could be used as the basis for truth claims. Thus traditionalist discourse included the locution faux ouvrier, or false worker, by which was meant a person who attempted to make a living without membership in a guild, either living a clandestine existence in a furnished room or working openly in a juridically privileged enclave, such as the faubourg Saint-Antoine in Paris, where unincorporated labor was tolerated.[^22] The falsity of such a worker was determined not by reference to any insufficiency of productivity (as was the “sterility” of a worker and the “reality” of a product in the Physiocratic scheme) but purely by social location—that is, the worker’s refusal or failure to find a corporate niche. Presumably, the falsity of the faux ouvrier extended to the incorrectness of his judgments, clouded as they were by the flights of imagination that his unsupervised situation did nothing to restrain.

Other corporate locutions formed on this model bore witness to the same assumptions. Members of the textile guilds decried Turgot’s 1776 edicts by pointing to the resultant arrival at the marketplace of what they called “false dyes,” in this case blue dyes whose ingredients differed from those stipulated by corporate regulations of 1669. The falsity of the commodity was gauged not only by its departure from the legal standard but also by the effect of such a deviation on the attitude of the public: blue dyes not containing the expected indigo were a “deceptive practice” that would destroy public confidence in the products of French artisans and cause consumers to look abroad to satisfy their needs. Here again truth (or falsity) referred to social location—to the supervised (or free) artisan whose productions were a known (or unknown) quantity and who consequently generated either a stable nexus of trust between producer and consumer or an unstable environment of mistrust. Worse still, the “false dyes” produced colors that were “brighter” and “more seductive” than those of the true dyes. The language here, designed to emphasize the potential for fraud in an unmonitored market, recalls typical eighteenth-century descriptions of the duping power of appeals to imagination.[^23]

Corporate discourse, in other words, did not directly address the question of how we know, but it did specify the social preconditions for an accurate apprehension of reality. Both sets of categories, the traditional corporate ones and the deliberately renovated ones of the well-made language, thus had in common a self-ascribed ability to obtain truth and, in the service of truth, to stand in a prophylactic relationship to imagination.

### Revolutionaries Confront the Imagination

The fears that the parlementaires had expressed preemptively in 1776 about the psychological effects of laissez-faire were, not surprisingly, voiced again when the Revolution actually began to dismantle traditional legal and social structures and boldly inaugurated a policy of “liberty.” Consider the long letter that Jean-Baptiste-Antoine Suard, a second-generation philosophe, addressed to Condorcet in 1789 arguing against the latter’s blanket advocacy of liberty. Condorcet wanted to end censorship in the theater as well as in the domain of the printed word. In declaring himself a supporter of freedom of the press only, Suard pointed to the serious drawbacks of an unsupervised theater. What filled him with foreboding was the impact of such a theater on the imagination—not the imagination of the isolate but that of the crowd member:

> One ordinarily reads a book alone and in a cool manner, communicating only to a few persons the impressions that one has received. Theatrical representations, by contrast, speak to the imagination and the senses; they can set all the passions in motion, and the impressions they produce acquire an extraordinary energy by the fact that a multitude of assembled persons experiences them simultaneously. Everyone knows the story of the people of Abdera whose imaginations were exalted to the point of insanity by seeing a performance of a tragedy by Aeschylus.

To the problem of imaginations brought to a fever pitch in the milieu of the theater, Suard offered a fundamentally conservative solution: restrict liberty and maintain censorship. To be sure, he had no use for the censorship of the Old Regime, which he characterized as capricious, secretive, cowardly, and inquisitorial. Instead he proposed a new-style Revolutionary censorship employing mechanisms of public deliberation. The system he envisioned would be administered by “wise and educated men, who love the arts and liberty”—even, presumably, when they are engaged in curtailing them—”who could not refuse their approval to a play or even a single feature of play without articulating their reasons, who would allow the author to defend his work and would invoke a police tribunal to decide between the author and the censor.”[^24]

Also writing in the early years of the Revolution, the comte de Mirabeau expressed similar worries about imagination but took, in assuaging them, the opposite tack, the one that the First Republic would later cultivate intensively. Imagination should be controlled, Mirabeau apparently believed, not by placing external limitations on human liberty but by a form of pedagogy that would mold the imagination directly, thus fortifying the psyche at its point of maximum vulnerability and enabling the citizen body to enjoy liberty without sinking into psychological and, eventually, social disorder.

Even before the Revolution, Mirabeau was alert to what might be called the sensory pedagogy of everyday life, or the continual impingement of the environment upon the mental apparatus to produce, for good or ill, certain prevalent sociopolitical attitudes. Thus his “Considérations sur l’ordre de Cincinnatus” (1784) expressed dismay at a new institutional development in the United States, a country that he had regarded as politically regenerated by its recent revolution. The order of Cincinnatus was composed of the veterans of the revolutionary wars, including George Washington. Membership in it was to be hereditary, passed on from father to son. The group had its own “mark of distinction”: a gold medal in the form of an eagle suspended from a dark blue ribbon edged in white. “Each member,” noted Mirabeau, “is to wear this ribbon and medal, just as in Europe the cross and other marks of chivalry are worn.” The order of Cincinnatus was, in other words, an incipient American nobility. Military in origin just like its European counterpart, it appeared to Mirabeau to be clearly en route to becoming an entrenched civil aristocracy.[^25]

Especially odious in Mirabeau’s view was the order’s adoption of an insignia, and he dwelt at length on the perverse power of such badges. Seemingly frivolous, they in fact “tightened the chains” of oppressed people through their direct appeal to the imagination. By its particular color and configuration, a ribbon or medal “seems to render visible to the eye the artificial inequality that usurpation and insolence began”; as an “imposing sign,” it “engraves the imagination of the weak” and thereby actually succeeds in producing an attitude of servility in those that gaze upon but do not wear it. In an extraordinary passage, Mirabeau then generalizes this theme.

> Man is a natural labeler; he associates or substitutes the sign for the thing. The sign so subjugates him that he places more importance on his conformity with an established formula than on true sentiments, honest motives, useful actions . . . Every sign is redoubtable and produces a great effect on the weak imagination of men. It is by striking their eyes that one endows them with whatever passions one chooses. . . . It is by the use of signs that several revolutions, either for the sake of liberty or of tyranny, have been prepared and carried out in certain states.

In other words, hereditary nobility can gain acceptance only when its proponents exercise sufficient control over the everyday visual environment to penetrate to the imaginations of ordinary people and to convince those people—wordlessly, repetitively, and without use of reason—of their baseness. A visual motif predominates in this sensationalist-psychological analysis of social relations: his eyes once struck by decorative signs of honor, the honest man “lowers his eyes” before them in implicit acknowledgment of his own inferiority. If the order of Cincinnatus threatens to corrupt American democracy, then the gold medal in the form of an eagle and the blue ribbon edged in white will be among the causes of that corruption, and the eyes and the imaginations of the American citizenry will be its chief instrument.[^26]

A man so attuned to the connection among visual images, the faculty of imagination, and sociopolitical structures could hardly fail to apply these insights to his own country in the aftermath of the 1789 Revolution. Newly and suddenly liberated from the straitjacket of traditional economic, social, political, and religious authority, the French people must have struck Mirabeau as possessing an extreme psychological plasticity that, although filled with promise, might just as well issue in disaster. Thus it is not surprising that found among Mirabeau’s papers at the time of his death in 1791 were drafts of three speeches on the subject of public education that he had planned to deliver before the Constituent Assembly. Two of the speeches concern the foundation of schools and school systems; the remaining one, of special interest to us here, proposes that classroom instruction be supplemented by another pedagogical medium: an annual cycle of “public festivals.” Under this heading Mirabeau, in effect, continued the ruminations of his essay on the order of Cincinnatus, pondering the way that images, and the impressionable imaginations to which they are relayed, can determine the political propensities of a people.

“In his capacity as a sensitive being,” Mirabeau asserts, “man is led much less by rigorous principles . . . than by majestic objects, striking images, great spectacles, deep emotions.” Put more baldly, man “obeys his impressions rather than his reason.” Merely showing him the truth is futile if you do not give him a passion for it—if you do not, in other words, “lay hold of his imagination.” Decisive political negotiations take place at the site of this mental faculty because, when appropriately stimulated, imagination can readily win men over to a “social organization that is entirely absurd, unjust and even cruel.”[^27]

The radical indeterminacy of imagination in its native condition necessitates that a polity, especially the new French polity hoping to infuse its citizens with generous ideals, undertake a schooling of the imagination by means of the public festival. “Up to now, Gentlemen,” Mirabeau warned his fellow legislators, “your institutions bear the imprint of a cold wisdom, of justice, of truth; but they still perhaps lack that which seizes man by all his senses, which fascinates him and sweeps him away.” The architects of the new France needed to learn more about the “secret ties that bind free peoples to their political institutions” and the “ties of happy fraternity that unite [citizens] among themselves.” In particular they needed to understand the use of public festivals, deployed to such great effect in ancient Greece and Rome, to create and reinforce such ties. Mirabeau recommended that nine festivals be held each year throughout France, four for civilians, four for soldiers, and one all-embracing national holiday. The festivals would bombard the citizenry with sense impressions—music, dance, paintings, sculpture—chosen for their ability to instill civic sentiments. Plays would be mounted at public expense with the same end in view: “to nourish both enthusiasm for liberty and respect for the public power that protects it.”[^28] The extraordinary energy of shared impressions, so feared by Suard within the context of an uncensored theater, would be deliberately channeled and exploited by the Revolution. The festival life of the new national community would join the rational science of political economy as a potent substitute for the restraints on imagination formerly exercised by corporate membership.

### The Progenitor: Rousseau on the Training of Imagination

As the Idéologue physician P.-J.-G. Cabanis noted in 1791 in his introduction to Mirabeau’s posthumously published speeches, the count “often made use of other people’s ideas but almost always recast and improved upon them.”[^29] In the case of civic education through the imagination, the “other people” whom Mirabeau mined for inspiration were, it seems, Condillac and Rousseau: Condillac for the psychology that highlighted the volatility of imagination and its extreme sensitivity to its surroundings; Rousseau for the pedagogical strategies aimed at that mental faculty. To be sure, both Condillac and Rousseau wrote significant works of pedagogy. But while Condillac’s Cours d’études pour l’instruction du Prince de Parme mentions the imagination only twice, Rousseau’s Emile invokes it more than sixty times.[^30] Although never explicitly cited by Mirabeau, the Emile, a text widely read in France in the second half of the eighteenth century, clearly forms the backdrop of his advocacy of public festivals. It also served other Revolutionary policymakers as a basic discursive resource. Hence its sustained meditation on imagination deserves consideration here. For just as Jean-Jacques’ discussion of masturbation in his Confessions contributed, if belatedly, to the discourse on the dangers of imagination (see Chapter 1), so the Emile contributed both to that discourse and, more pointedly, to its antidote. It proposed practices that could actively harness the imagination for positive ends or neutralize its potential for harm.

Implicitly building on Condillac’s sensationalist psychology, the Emile places the imagination close to the heart of its theory of education. It describes a double movement on the part of the tutor with respect to the pupil’s imagination: at times an effort to keep that faculty dormant, to refrain from stimulating it; at other times, an equally deliberate effort to arouse it. Rousseau sets forth the problematic of the imagination early in Book I. Our desires and abilities are, he postulates, evenly matched in the state of nature. However, the awakening of imagination vastly extends our desires without a corresponding increase in our abilities, thus making us prey to unhappiness. This disequilibrium argues powerfully for curtailing the activity of imagination: “The real world has its limits, the imaginary world is infinite. Unable to enlarge the one, let us restrict the other.”[^31]

Imagination exposes us to unnecessary unhappiness not only through its kindling of insatiable, artificial desires but also by its propensity to excite fear:

> Do I hear absolutely nothing? I am not for that reason tranquil because, in the last analysis, even something without noise might surprise me. . . . Thus forced to set my imagination in motion, I am soon no longer its master, and everything I do to reassure myself only alarms me further. If I hear noise, I hear robbers; if I hear nothing, I see phantoms.

In this situation, too, imagination requires careful management. Rousseau proposes the basic technique: “In everything, habit kills imagination.” The way, then, to rid ourselves of imaginary fears is by repetitive counterphobic behavior; if we thoroughly accustom ourselves to the objects of our fears, encounters with those objects will stir only the safe and sober faculty of memory and utterly fail to rouse the notoriously unreliable faculty of imagination. “Do not, then, reason with him whom you want to cure of loathing of the dark. Take him out in it often. . . .”[^32] Rousseau’s dictum on this subject became widely known and inspired other eighteenth-century French pedagogues to propose comparable techniques for subduing the fretful imagination. Thus, in Madame de Genlis’s epistolary novel, Adèle et Théodore, ou Lettres sur l’éducation (1782), where Rousseau’s “night games” are explicitly recommended “to preserve [children] forever from those gloomy ideas that have so much power over the imagination,” the Baron also offers comparable pedagogical inventions of his own—for example, a glass-enclosed armoire displaying anatomical specimens that, placed in a corridor of the house regularly traversed by his offspring, allegedly neutralizes their superstitious, infantile fear of skeletons.[^33]

But if Emile’s tutor frequently takes pains to extinguish his pupil’s nascent imagination in childhood, the boy’s subsequent development—from a virtuous but self-enclosed to a fully social being—demands that his imagination be not globally dampened but selectively kindled. For according to Rousseau, we exit the narrow circle of ourselves and form attachments with others only by means of imagination. “The first act of [a meticulously raised young man’s] burgeoning imagination is to instruct him that he has fellow-creatures (semblables).” Our ties to our semblables depend upon an imaginative identification with them and, more specifically, a capacity to commiserate with their pain. The phenomenology of such attachment is a taking up of temporary, imaginative residence in the other. “It is not inside ourselves but inside [the semblable] that we suffer [ . . . ]. Thus a person becomes sensitive only insofar as his imagination comes to life and begins to transport him outside himself.” Though written in a lyrical, evocative prose, Rousseau’s comments obey a strict, underlying systematicity. Thus he observes that the habituation techniques that the tutor recommended to keep a fearful imagination in check have the comparable effect of dulling an empathetic imagination and are, for that reason, to be studiously avoided when empathy rather than sangfroid is the desired result: “What one too often sees, one no longer imagines, and it is only through imagination that we feel another’s sorrows. By dint of seeing death and suffering [on a routine basis], priests and physicians become pitiless.”[^34]

The tutor declines to assume the task of transforming Emile from a social being into a full-fledged political one, regarding the young man’s exceptional virtue as incompatible with the corruption of contemporary politics. Yet if a complete education for citizenship is not on the agenda, he nonetheless draws on political examples in the final stage of his pupil’s training. Before instructing Emile to seek a wife, the tutor launches on a long digression about constructing one’s public persona: how to make one’s verbal utterances count and to “engrave [them] on the memory” of one’s audience. Once again the imagination is key:

> One of the errors of our era is to employ reason too nakedly, as if men were only mind. In neglecting the language of signs that speaks to the imagination, we have lost the most forceful of languages. Speech always makes a feeble impression, and one speaks much better to the heart through the eyes than though the ears.

In support of this proposition, he cites the practices of the Romans (“How great was the attention that the Romans paid to language of signs!”), who reserved different clothing for different ages and stations, who insisted that accused persons and candidates wear special costumes, whose warriors vaunted their bravery by displaying their wounds, who heeded the minutiae of ceremonies: where the people were assembled, whether they could see the Capitol from that spot, whether they were turned in the direction of the Senate.[^35]

From the discussion of a pedagogy of imagination in the Emile to Mirabeau’s proposal for public festivals in 1791 is only a short step. Clearly Mirabeau draws on Rousseau’s suggestions for an active exploitation of imagination rather than on the tactics designed to prevent the premature awakening of that faculty. However, with respect to the creation of fraternal social ties, he sounds much like Emile’s tutor. Man possesses in a higher degree than other animals, Mirabeau asserts, the capacity to “share in the affections of all beings, and especially those of his semblables.” Furthermore, this essentially imaginative identification with the other, or installation of oneself into the psyche of the other by imaginative means, is the “wellspring of all benevolent sentiments, of the enthusiasms of friendship,” and of supreme importance in the new French polity born of the Revolution, “of devotion to the fatherland.”[^36]

### Revolutionary Political Culture: The Refurbished Environment of Everyday Life

Speaking before one of the legislative houses of the Directory in the Year VII, an obscure deputy spelled out a basic principle of sensationalist psychology. Said Joubert (de l’Hérault), “[E]ducation does not consist solely of formal instruction. . . . [W]e are much less the pupils of our teachers than of the circumstances that have surrounded us, of the objects that have frequently attracted our glances and captured our attention.”[^37] Joubert complained that his colleagues had not yet fully grasped the import of this principle, that it cried out for intensive cultivation. But in fact, many Revolutionaries had already applied it quite assiduously, attempting to turn the French population into a nation of stable, civic-minded citizens by creating new practices and institutions that would alter the environment of everyday life for the express purpose of altering the mental furniture of everybody. Those new and presumably transformative practices and institutions included four that will be considered here: the regular cycle of festivals favored from the outset by Mirabeau; the wearing of special clothing by public officials; the renaming of city streets; and the adoption of a new Revolutionary calendar. In surveying the components of this Revolutionary culture, it is for our purposes most important to notice how closely its advocates hewed to the tenets of sensationalist psychology and, especially, how concerned they were in their tinkerings with the environment to harness the imagination for civic ends. The political pronouncements examined below reveal that the psychology of Condillac had become nothing less than a quasiofficial component of the Revolutionary ideology.

Most supporters of the Revolution shared the belief contained in Mirabeau’s posthumous papers: that the regenerated French nation required a series of national festivals to commemorate Revolutionary milestones and to renew the fraternal and patriotic bonds forged at those peak moments. Supplementary articles to the 1791 Constitution announced the desirability of such a festival cycle. But, only under the Jacobins in the Year II was a coherent system of festivals finally devised and enacted into law. It would last until the end of the Directory in 1799.[^38]

The spectacular political festival was hardly a new idea. Historians have noted the continuity of the Revolutionaries’ project with the practices of the Bourbon kings, even at the level of the decorative motifs employed and the bureaucratic agencies charged with responsibility. Nor was it outside Louis XVI’s repertory to celebrate the French nation and its component regions as well as the French monarchy.[^39] Specific to the Revolutionary era, however, was the self-conscious effort to turn the festival form into a civic pedagogy grounded in psychological theory. Even the location of the festival—the revolutionaries preferred an open space that provided an uninterrupted vista, making every movement of the participants immediately visible—testified to the guiding role of sensationalist principles.[^40] A sampling of deputies’ speeches and pamphlets from the periods of the Republic and Directory reveals the extent to which the festivals were construed as an exercise in applied sensationalist psychology.

Thus, in the course of advocating that civic festivals be staged at regular, closely spaced intervals, one deputy declared, “Speak to the senses and to the imagination of the people if you wish to exalt their enthusiasm for your institutions.”[^41] Other legislators added a historical dimension to this argument, indicating the precedents on which the Revolutionaries ought to draw. They depicted Catholic priests as intuitive sensationalist psychologists avant la lettre, clever manipulators who had long ago learned to use sensory stimulation to produce and sustain popular loyalty to clerical institutions. When Constantine converted to Christianity, one deputy remarked, the personnel of that religion refused to allow any other power within the Roman Empire to sponsor festivals and ceremonies or, what is the same thing, “to have a language for the senses and the imagination and to speak to men by means of images.” It would ill behoove the French Revolutionaries, another deputy asserted, to let this priestly wisdom lapse. They must embrace the weapons of their enemies and bend them to their own purposes.[^42]

Yet another deputy, Merlin de Thionville, argued for the national festivals in a more philosophically elaborate fashion by expressing the goal of the Revolution in terms of Condillac’s celebrated definition of science as a system of pellucid signification. Citing Condillac by name, he noted that the “art of reasoning well can be reduced to the art of skillfully speaking a well-made language, and the art of making oneself understood by a great people can be reduced to pronouncing a sonorous language adeptly.” What he called the “analytic part of the Revolution” was the transformation of France into a kind of communicative utopia where “no one can speak without knowing what he means and without making himself understood.” In Merlin’s scheme, the national festivals, although operating primarily at the prelinguistic level, fostered and indeed served as the prototype of this political-cum-epistemological goal of perfect transparency. Take, for example, Merlin’s description of choral music at the festival. The “common organ” created by the “limitless association of thousands of human voices,” all “united by fraternity and warmed by the same sentiment,” would achieve “direct communication”—presumably communication by means of sentiment and sensory stimulation, largely dispensing with the mediation of words, and infallibly able to “make [its message] understood by all who wish to understand.”[^43]

This rhetoric eventually came around full circle. When, after the Napoleonic coup, the national festivals fell into official disfavor, those who denounced them likewise drew their arguments from sensationalist psychology. A comprehensive report on Parisian cultural institutions commissioned by the municipality in 1801 recommended the abolition of the annual cycle of festivals and its compression into a single national holiday on July 14. The report emphasized the anomaly of the Revolutionary practice (“the annals of all the world’s peoples offer us no other example of a purely political festival”) and the sheer wrongheadedness of attempting an exclusively political commemoration of founding principles. Insofar as such commemorations sought to perpetuate the political order, said the report, they required the sanction of religious institutions, which alone were lasting. Their singular durability derived not only from the intrinsic truth of their doctrines but also from their leaders’ intuitive grasp of sensationalist psychology.

Thus the detractors of the Revolutionary festivals took over wholesale a discursive motif dear to their champions: the wisdom of emulating priestly techniques. The report criticized the Revolutionaries for having concocted festivals whose dry pedagogical component evinced a foolish disregard of the lessons of religious ritual, with its arsenal of “signs evoking respect and confidence.” Any effective ceremony necessarily employed a semiotics that addressed the “senses by means of emblems that at once signify, express, and are analogous to ideas.” The people were capable of learning this “language of allegory,” though not overnight. In this area, too, the organizers of the Revolutionary festivals had blundered, frequently changing the signs and symbols they presented to the public. Since the political festival was originally “a borrowing from religion,” the government could do no better than to continue its imitation of the Church by restoring the divinity to the festival and establishing a fixed ceremonial language of signs.[^44] Penned at the very opening of the new century, this pronouncement exemplified a typically nineteenth-century tendency to embrace religion as much for its utility as for its truth. It also indicated the axiomatic status still enjoyed by sensationalist psychology at this historical juncture.

Supporting the mission of the national festivals during the period of the Republic were other cultural contrivances similarly reliant on the mechanisms of sensationalist psychology for their presumed effects. Two of these were proposed by the abbé Henri Grégoire, the Revolutionary legislator whose most celebrated project, that of “annihilating patois and universalizing the French language,” had also sought legitimacy from an explicit invocation of Condillac. In Grégoire’s view, French was a better-made language than the various patois spoken in the countryside, which preserved antiquated opinions in their very vocabularies. The “linguistic imperfection” of such crude idioms, said Grégoire paraphrasing Condillac, was “a major source of error.” Universalizing French would, by contrast, help to spread enlightenment evenly throughout the population, enabling intellectual consensus and fostering social unity.[^45]

The very next year Grégoire appeared before the Convention with another report and draft bill, soon to be enacted into law, on the “costumes of legislators and other public functionaries.” He recommended, for example, that all legislators wear long robes, which would be white for the members of the Conseil des Cinq Cents, and blue violet for the members of the Conseil des Anciens.[^46] His report was a kind of mirror image of Mirabeau’s observations on the Order of Cincinnatus. Whereas Mirabeau had faulted the use of insignia that operated on the imaginations of the people to create and enforce an unwarranted distinction between noble and commoner, Grégoire proposed to use costume to operate on the imaginations of the people to produce an entirely justified awe for the guardians of the Republic. To make his case, he raided the arsenal of sensationalist psychology and came up with the usual discursive maneuvers. He observed that the “language of signs has an eloquence all its own” and that “costumes form a part of that idiom”; their sensuous properties revived pertinent ideas and emotions, “especially when they take hold of the imagination by their splendor.” Nor did he think that “this [sartorial] apparatus ought to strike only vulgar eyes.” The language of signs was a legitimate and suitable means of communicating with every sort of person and a necessary supplement to a theoretical discussion of politics:

> We all have senses, which are, so to speak, the doors of the soul. We are all susceptible of receiving, by their mediation, deep impressions. Hence those who would pretend to govern a people by philosophical theories can hardly be called philosophers. The man who is most detached from everything material responds to the glamour of decorations and to the magic of the imitative arts. The one who most prides himself on having only reason for a guide has perhaps followed its voice less often than he has yielded to the illusions of the imagination and the senses.[^47]

So, too, Grégoire’s proposal for a new “system of topographical denominations for the public places, streets, embankments, etc. of every commune in the Republic” derived in part from his belief in sensationalist psychology. Expecting his colleagues in the Convention to oppose such a project as “too finicky and painstaking to occupy the legislature,” he countered preemptively, “When a government is completely overhauled, no abuse should escape the reforming scythe; everything must be republicanized.” To refrain from renaming the elements of the urban landscape would be to miss an opportunity for quotidian civic instruction—in this case, by displaying at each corner “names and emblems capable of exercising the mind for useful ends, acting on the heart, and arousing patriotism.” Each name, Grégoire specified, should be carefully chosen to function as the “vehicle of a thought, or better still of a sentiment which causes citizens to remember their rights and duties, which tightens the bonds of fraternity and strengthens the love of liberty.” This omni-pedagogic urban environment would work primarily through the eyes that read the street signs. (Grégoire was, in this instance, proposing a quite literal language of signs!) The pedagogic city would also have a deliberately auditory component since Grégoire recommended that the topographic denominations be “short and sonorous,” not only easy on the tongue but also attractive to the ear.[^48] As singular as Grégoire’s proposal might appear, it actually had roots in the mid-eighteenth century, when the abbé Etienne Teisserenc, similarly imbued with sensationalist psychology (as were so many architects and urban planners of the era), proposed renaming the streets of the capital. His goal was not, of course, revolutionary regeneration but the statist-cum-nationalist one of making provincials feel immediately at home in Paris and thus cementing ties between center and periphery.[^49]

Grégoire’s street name project never mentioned the imagination as the mental faculty to be targeted by euphonious and meaning-laden signs. But the chief spokesman for the Revolutionary calendar did have recourse that much-used topos, frankly depicting the part of the reform concerned with verbal renovation (as opposed to the arithmetic renovation that divided the year into units calculated according to the decimal system) as a technology of the imagination geared to nation-building.

That spokesman was none other than Fabre d’Eglantine, whom we already encountered in Chapter 1 as the playwright whose preoccupation with uncontrolled, overactive imagination had, five years before, found expression in his comedy Le Présomptueux, ou l’heureux imaginaire. There is evidence that Fabre had long been steeped in Enlightenment philosophy, including its psychological branch. A poem that he wrote early in the 1780s thanks Buffon for having converted Nature into “my supreme lesson” whose observable features “disclose precious secrets to humans.” Fabre’s new relationship to Nature has, he attests, changed him personally from a timid, rudderless creature into an astute and unflappable student, “a telescope at my eye, a sounding line in my hand,” so persuaded of a fundamental order that he feels no alarm even if the earth shakes under his feet. Fabre-as-poet avows that he sometimes extends this mode of calm scientific observation to the psychological realm, “into the shadow and the silence of my own individual being.” Here he “probes the movement” and comes to understand the channels by which he “senses, touches, and knows.”[^50]

The adept of sensationalist psychology comes through clearly when Fabre, as deputy to the Convention, reported to his colleagues on the reform of the calendar: his commission would believe itself to have carried out its mission if it “succeeded in striking the imagination” by means of the names that it affixed to the months of the year. “We conceive nothing except by means of images,” he intoned in the didactic style favored in Jacobin political discourse. “In the most abstract analysis, in the most metaphysical speculation, our intellect registers only images.” Long habitual use of the Gregorian calendar under the Old Regime had already stocked the minds of the people with a “considerable number of images.” In their effort to subjugate the human race, the priestly inventors of that calendar had, after all, shown great skill at “seizing the imagination of men and governing it as they pleased.” Fabre recommended the retaliatory strategy much touted by republicans: opportunistically imitating priestly techniques (which were, he implied, formal equivalents of the techniques suggested by sensationalist psychology) in order to instill reverence for secular objects of “public utility.”

Hence Fabre proposed that the names of months summon up images of the soil and the sky. These real, natural objects would banish the “fantastic objects” of religion with which the priests had so cleverly cluttered their calendar—for example, saints’ days presenting St. John as the distributor of the harvest or St. Mark as the protector of the vine. Honest, mundane gratitude for the bounty of nature would replace servile dependence on saintly or priestly intercession as the dominant calendrical motif. The new months of republican provenance would work on the imagination, in part, by auditory, onomatopoeic means: the autumnal months (for example, Brumaire) would have a serious sound and a medium tempo; those of winter (for example, Pluviôse) a heavy sound and a slow tempo; those of spring (for example, Floréal) a gay sound and a brisk tempo; and those of summer (for example, Fructidor) a resonant sound and a broad, relaxed tempo. Visual images would be at least equally powerful. For example, on the first day of the month of Germinal, the beginning of spring “will be effortlessly painted on the imagination” because the initial syllable carries the image of a shoot, a sprouting seed (germe).[^51]

The world ushered in by the French Revolution was, as these four cultural innovations indicate, a world in which the viewpoint of sensationalist psychology was validated by official discourse and used as the basis of official policy. The embrace of sensationalism meant that the objects of the material environment were not regarded as dumb and inert but rather as “speaking to” human beings, who were in turn construed as organisms sensitive almost to the point of quivering, and not sealed off from but readily permeated by their surroundings. While this situation of human porosity harbored dangers, it could also be turned into an opportunity and a boon. The mental faculties—and, in particular, the notoriously plastic imagination—could be affected in ways inimical to social order. But, if the initiative were seized by right-thinking people, imagination could also be intentionally shaped and cultivated for social ends. Based on scientific principles, psychological engineering could thus make a virtue of the vulnerability inherent in imagination.

### The Central Schools and the Teaching of Condillac

At the beginning of his famous “Report on the Principles of Political Morality” delivered to the Convention in the Year II in the name of the Committee on Public Safety to anticipate and justify the Terror, Robespierre disclaimed any tyrannical intentions or Machiavellian strategies on the part of the highly centralized Jacobin republic. Proof of this irreproachability would, he said, be found in the “Report” itself, which laid bare the goals of his government, the obstacles in its path, and the means proposed to surmount those obstacles and reach those goals. Providing such information was a tack that a “lax and corrupt government” would never dare to take. “A king, a haughty senate, a Caesar, a Cromwell are obliged above all to cover their plans. . . . For ourselves, we come to make the world privy to your political secrets.”[^52]

The same argument might have been adduced—though I do not think it ever was—to explain the establishment of the écoles centrales, or central schools, by the law of 3 ventôse Year III and the so-called Daunou Law of 3 brumaire Year IV. Although the Republic had been applying the tenets of sensationalist psychology to inculcate civic principles in the population, it had no desire to mold citizens behind their backs. Sensationalist psychology was not, in a republic, a secret tool with which to fashion a fundamentally passive and pliable citizen body; republican leaders were not like priests, using crucifixes and incense to overawe the imaginations of their gullible flocks. Instead, the citizens would be taught all they needed to know to understand their own genealogy as patriots; they would appreciate how their sensory organs had, at the national festivals and on renamed city streets, been deliberately bombarded to shape their intellects. In short, the Republic gave high priority to teaching sensationalist psychology to its citizens, thus making them conscious collaborators in their own political education. In the name of individual autonomy, it politicized a commitment to cognitive self-reflexivity already evident in Condillac’s 1775 pedagogical treatise. “Why then,” Condillac had mused in his capacity as tutor to the prince of Parma, “couldn’t one make [the child] notice what is happening within him when he judges or reasons, when he desires or forms habits?”[^53] The pupil should not merely be educated at the hands of the tutor but should actively understand the process of education transforming his mind.

The central schools were secondary schools, designed to replace the collèges of the Old Regime by providing instruction to adolescent males. They were established on a uniform plan, one per department throughout France. To some extent they embodied laissez-faire in the realm of education: they had virtually no admission requirements, no required courses, no graded classes or fixed term of enrollment, and they awarded no degrees or certificates.[^54] On the other hand, their curriculum did not reflect a free play of divergent approaches but rather a single, coherent epistemological and pedagogical position, one organized around and thoroughly permeated with sensationalist psychology. For example, courses in drawing and natural history aimed, in part, to strengthen the students’ visual acuity and powers of observation in order to improve the quality of the sensory input from which all mental processes were supposed to derive. In the case of natural history, a discipline centered on the taxonomy of the plant and animal kingdoms, the student would also learn rudimentary skills connected to the great epistemological principle: the correct assignment of words to things.[^55] Furthermore, the drawing course, although primarily geared to training artisans and fostering the observational skills of ordinary citizens, was also conceived as serving the long-term needs of the republic in its role as producer and consumer of patriotic spectacle.[^56] And just as Fabre d’Eglantine, the author of a pre-Revolutionary play about imagination, reappeared after 1789 as a legislator intent on striking the imaginations of the citizenry by means of a new calendar, so too J. J. Bachelier, who had under the Old Regime attempted to discipline artisans’ imaginations at the Ecole gratuite de dessin, resurfaced during the Directory as professor of drawing at the central school of the Pantheon in Paris.[^57]

Explicit instruction in the tenets of sensationalist psychology at the central schools, as well as in the theory of language derived from it, formed the task of a more advanced course, that in “general grammar.” The unusual name of the course[^58] tended to raise false expectations and inspire a slightly comical confusion in the student body. Thus the professor of general grammar in the department of the Ardennes recounted ruefully that his course

> had initially had about thirty students, but this large number was the result of a misunderstanding caused by ignorance of the subject matter treated: the students generally believed that the purpose of the course was to teach the French language, and they appeared very surprised that they had been mistaken.

The students listened respectfully to the professor’s explanation of general grammar and seemed to accept his reasoning. However, voting with their feet (the terms of the law gave them complete freedom to choose their courses from among the various offerings that the school was obliged to provide), they nonetheless deserted Citizen Magin, whose enrollment plummeted to ten within a month.[^59] His colleague in the Creuse told a similar tale. In that department, the prevailing opinion that general grammar meant French grammar had a negative impact on the morale of the pupils who, upon entering the course, were shocked and “repelled to hear talk of the generation of ideas, the development of the intellectual faculties, and sensations as the rudiments of our ideas.”[^60]

But if the term “general grammar” perplexed some of the students—and if certain more remote regions of France were unable to find local men qualified to teach that newfangled subject matter[^61]—the cadre of professors of general grammar recruited to the central schools displayed an impressive readiness for their job, unprecedented as that job was in the history of French education. Their descriptions of the course, written to satisfy an exigent minister of the interior or printed on posters for the information of prospective pupils, followed no standard model or rote formula. Though they had common themes, the words were those of the professors themselves.[^62] Perhaps the most sophisticated rendition was the semiotic one offered by Citizen Thiébault, assigned to teach the course at one of the Paris central schools. The government had, he said, substituted a chair called “general grammar” for the more traditional one in speculative philosophy to make a critical point: that insofar as philosophers have access to ideas, judgments, and mental operations, insofar as they gain familiarity with them and are able to meditate on them, they do so only by means of language.[^63]

References to Condillac abound in the copious ministerial archives that document the state’s oversight of the new educational system. Citizen Gattel, who taught in the central school of the Isère in Grenoble, where he numbered among his pupils the young Henri Beyle later to become the novelist Stendhal, told his superiors that insofar as the course in general grammar derived from any single thinker, it followed most closely the lines laid out in the oeuvre of Condillac.[^64] A table compiled by the state bureaucrats to summarize the results of a questionnaire sent to all the professors of general grammar in the Year VII reveals that well over half reported heavy reliance on Condillac’s works in preparing their lessons.[^65] One even grafted onto Condillac the nationalist gloss featured in Grégoire’s language project, saying that he sought to teach his pupils “how the mind of an individual or a nation becomes true or false, deep or superficial, in accordance with whether the language spoken is well or badly made.”[^66] Another wanted the government to buy Condillac’s complete works for the central school library, complaining that its collection currently reflected the intellectual “taste of monks” and that it was unfair to expect the professors to supply the necessary holdings at their own expense.[^67]

Reviewing the lesson plans of the professors of general grammar, the Council on Public Instruction called the one they received from Chambéry “a small masterpiece,” adding, “It is at bottom just the doctrine of Condillac but expounded by a man capable of one day evaluating that doctrine and improving upon it.”[^68] Among the many adepts of Condillac should also be mentioned Citizen Merlet-Laboulaye who, precariously perched in civil-war country “between the unfortunate Vendée and the Chouans,” embodied the spirit of this pedagogy by teaching both the general grammar and the botany courses at the central school in the Maine-et-Loire. Working in a garden laid out according to Linnaean classifications, Merlet-Laboulaye recognized all of his pupils as “capable of observation” and admonished them to study the plants at leisure before or after the lesson; the test of pedagogical success was the pupils’ ability to identify the new plants that they encountered “without committing prejudicial errors.” Small wonder that this amateur botanist referred to the material covered in his general grammar course as the “natural history of speech.”[^69]

That the Republic was able to enlist a sizable corps of professors of general grammar at such short notice to staff the central schools certainly bespeaks an extensive and serious dissemination of Condillac in France by the end of the Old Regime. The main locus of that dissemination was not the universities, though even in those bastions of tradition, Cartesianism had waned and the philosophy professoriate could at least entertain the tenets of Lockean empiricism.[^70] Rather, insofar as it was associated with any formal institution, Condillac’s epistemology seems to have flourished in the collèges, especially after the expulsion of the Jesuits in 1762. After that date these schools fell into the hands of orders, principally the Oratorians and Pères de la Doctrine Chrétienne, which by the mid-eighteenth century were losing their character as religious communities and taking on a new identity as secularized organizations of teachers. Their members tended to postpone or avoid altogether their ordination as Catholic priests; they were loath to wear cassocks; they mingled in the world. Their intellectual tastes ran to Enlightenment philosophy. And they tended to greet the Revolution with sympathy, more than half of them playing an active role on its behalf between 1789 and 1792. Not surprisingly, then, the central schools of the Directory recruited their faculty very heavily from among former members of these orders.[^71]

The professor of general grammar at the central school of the Var emblematizes this type. Citizen Ortolan had been a teacher with the Pères de la Doctrine Chrétienne for fourteen years before the outbreak of the Revolution and was recruited to the central school shortly after its foundation. In his response to the ministerial questionnaire, he mentioned Condillac as the primary source of the instruction in general grammar that he dispensed to the adolescent boys of Toulon. Recognizing his pupils’ poor preparation and, as he put it on the official poster, wanting to render himself “more useful” to his fellow citizens, he secured municipal approval to open a private course in French and Italian. Since the course mingled ordinary language instruction with training in Condillac’s epistemology, the pupils would, Ortolan promised, emerge from it with “their minds fortified by the analytic method and by the knowledge of true principles.” They would then be ready to embark on the public course in general grammar—where they would receive an even stronger dose of Condillac![^72]

The efficacy with which professors conveyed the fundamentals of general grammar to their central school pupils no doubt varied widely. At one extreme was the experience of Citizen Magin: he said of the faithful remnant who remained in his course after two-thirds of their classmates had abandoned it that they “encouraged me more by their goodwill . . . and their industry than by their progress.”[^73] At the other extreme was Citizen Gattel, who so indelibly imprinted his pupil Stendhal with general grammar that in his autobiographical Life of Henry Brulard written some four decades later, Stendhal hailed the “excellent law on the central schools” and fondly remembered the advice of his professors, “‘My child, study the Logic of Condillac, it is the basis of everything.’”[^74] But if degrees of actual success are extremely difficult to measure, pedagogical intention is easier to discern.

Despite the highly abstract nature of general grammar, the charge of the central schools at their inception was to disseminate that novel subject matter widely and democratically. It is true that two twentieth-century historians retrospectively called the general grammar class of the central schools a “factory of the elite”[^75] and that A.-L.-C. Destutt de Tracy, who wrote the basic textbook for the central schools after the Napoleonic coup d’état, contemplated separate educational regimens for the working class (classe ouvrière) and the intelligentsia (classe savante).[^76] Still, the republican policymakers never envisioned general grammar as a master foundational theory to be reserved to the leaders of society and used by them to keep the mass of the population appropriately tractable. After all, students at the central schools chose their courses freely, and those students came in roughly equal numbers from the bourgeoisie and the working classes.[^77]

The democratic assumptions and impulses behind the teaching of general grammar in the central schools can be seen in the comments made by professors of that subject in the materials they submitted to the Ministry of the Interior. Citizen Descoles at the central school in Nîmes noted that “the [physiological] organization of men being everywhere the same, apart from certain minor differences of no importance here, we must conclude that men are everywhere endowed with the same faculties, . . . that they receive the same impressions at the sight of or by contact with the same objects, that they have the same simple ideas arrived at in the same manner, etc.” To be sure, Descoles worried about the lack of preparation of his general grammar pupils (“it is not very easy to make oneself understood when speaking a more or less abstract language to young people deficient in complex ideas”), but his egalitarian credo boosted his courage. Lack of preparation had a distinctly positive side in that “prejudices have not yet given false directions” to “fresh minds.” Furthermore, the appropriate pedagogy could make any subject matter accessible to anyone. “I am convinced,” he asserted confidently, “that there is a simple metaphysics within the capacity of even the youngest children. . . .”[^78] Similarly, a public poster for Citizen Ortolan’s private course, envisioned as a prologomenon to his general grammar course at the central school in Toulon, attested, “I will try to put within the grasp of the most mediocre minds all the most metaphysical writings” of such theorists as Condillac, Court de Gébelin, Dumarsais, and Beauzée.[^79] Citizen Laurent, an ex-Oratorian, assured his bureaucratic supervisors of the ease of teaching Condillac, the “ingenious author” whose simple and precise style was readily understandable by young people—apparently even those in Laurent’s general grammar class in the Haute-Saône who spelled so poorly that they could not read what they had written and had thus caused their professor to forsake dictation as a pedagogical exercise.[^80] And even the class-conscious pronouncements of Destutt de Tracy after the fall of the Republic did not diverge from the principle that the working classes would, in some fashion, learn general grammar rather than being unwittingly manipulated by it. If the education of the poor was to be “distinct from” that of the comfortable classes, the distinction would reside in the depth and intensity of instruction rather than in the subject matter expounded. The poor would, Tracy stipulated, learn a “summary” and “abridgment” (abrégé) of what had been taught to the well-off, future savants.[^81]

Nor was instruction in sensationalist theory confined during the Revolution to the adolescent age-cohort recruited by the central schools. Under the Directory, at least one private evening course in the “art of reasoning” based on “physiological observations” sprang up in Paris. The instructor, a certain Pinglin, attested that he had boiled down that indispensable art “to a single principle,” which he promised to place “within the grasp of people of all ages and all mental capacities” if they congregated near the Louvre at 5:30 PM for his lessons.[^82] (See Figure 2.) Pinglin, we can assume, sought a predominantly adult clientele in this forum. Another venture of his, the periodical L’Ami des campagnes, transferred his project of dissemination to a print medium and targeted not Parisians but rural people. His goal as editor was to make “common knowledge accessible to the least cultivated minds,” and to this end he supplied not only the political news that concerned the country dweller as a citizen, the medical principles that would help him protect his health, and the literary news that would give him a patina of enlightenment, but first and foremost, in a treatise on “intellectual education” serialized over more than ten issues, the outlines of a sensationalist psychology that would “teach him to direct personally the first developments of [his children’s] minds.”[^83] Like Destutt de Tracy, Pinglin put his faith in the abrégé as the means of disseminating difficult epistemological concepts among the vulgaire. “The more a science is perfected,” he stated confidently, “the less space it takes up in a library.”[^84]

[To view this image, refer to the print version of this title.]

Figure 2: The Popularization of Sensationalist Psychology. This handbill advertises the logic course of a freelance teacher, one F. Pinglin, held in Paris, probably under the revolutionary regime of the Directory in the closing years of the eighteenth century. Using the idiom of Condillac without mentioning him by name, Pinglin promises his prospective students that they will learn the theory and practice of correct thinking and the “art of ensuring against error” if they sign up for lessons three times a décade (the ten-day period that replaced the week in the revolutionary calendar). The total length of the course and Pinglin’s fee are left unspecified. (Bibliothèque Nationale de France)

Pinglin was not the only self-appointed grass-roots propagator of sensationalism. In 1789 Laurent-Pierre Bérenger, a former professor of rhetoric at the collège of Orléans who several years before had run afoul of the royal censor because of his anticlerical writings, published a two-volume anthology of selected texts called Esprit de Mably et de Condillac. Featured in the Condillac volume was a condensation of the master’s pedagogical classic, his plan of study for the prince of Parma.[^85] Still further abbreviated, that condensation found its way into a handy forty-page pamphlet that appeared shortly after Thermidor, billed as the work of an anonymous “Citizen B***.”[^86] And in eerie fulfillment of Berenger’s 1789 wish that powerful European nations might one day consider institutionalizing Condillac in state-sponsored schools, Berenger himself became a professor at a central school in Lyon under the Directory.[^87]

### Combating Imagination with Condillac’s Philosophy

As was the case with Condillac himself, the administrators of the central schools believed that the subject matter that went under the name of general grammar was the best prophylactic against disorderly flights of imagination. Thus a flyer distributed in the Ariège railed against those who tried to undermine the local central school by alleging the irreligious nature of its curriculum and by touting to parents the superior virtues of the pre-Revolutionary collèges and of the private schools that were currently seeking to imitate them. Such backward-looking assertions were simply false:

> In the old collèges, young people lost a long series of years painfully learning a language that no People any longer speaks, learning words, words, nothing but words. And if they finally reached philosophy, which is supposed to teach things, those things were most often false or uncertain notions, imaginary systems, chimerical things devoid of reality.[^88]

Citizen Thiébault, an elderly professor of general grammar in Paris, concurred with this assessment of the “old” philosophy as recklessly exposing students to the perils of imagination. Except for a philosophy based on sensationalist psychology and the analysis of language, he declared, “Every other route threatens us with wandering in the void or in illusions.” If philosophy as traditionally construed had so often led men astray, it was because “abstract conceptions” have “no purchase on man.” Presumably because it revealed the man-made and ultimately sensory origins of abstract ideas, general grammar was “the sole instrument that they can use with certainty.”[^89] Several years later, in a published version of his curricular recommendations, Thiébault made the same anthropocentric, Condillac-inspired point with greater elegance and economy. He denounced all previous philosophical instruction as so much “hairsplitting,” noting that the attempts, characteristic of speculative metaphysics, “to study the mind of man outside of man himself” doomed the philosopher to the “vast regions of the imagination,” where he chased after chimeras and ended up with mad, irresoluble questions. Condillac’s method of studying reason through language, by contrast, banished the imaginary from philosophy and gave the investigator “a tangible and real hold on himself.”[^90]

Citizen Magin, who had the demoralizing experience of watching most of his students desert his general grammar course in the Ardennes, lost none of his enthusiasm for that subject matter and later wrote of its particular suitability for the age group recruited by the central schools. Since the physiological changes associated with puberty overstimulated imagination, adolescents urgently needed general grammar for the “regulation of [their] reason.” As Magin described the situation, imagination and general grammar were opposing forces:

> The topic of this course [general grammar] is the study of the intellectual faculties of man; its goal is to learn how to direct them toward the truth and to lead the human understanding to its full perfection. The professor receives his pupils during the precious time of adolescence, when nature completes its development of the organs of sensitivity, renders them susceptible to all impressions and foments an unavoidable revolution in the mind and heart of man. This revolution must be guided with all the more attention because its consequences are dangerous and because, with imagination seizing hold of every perception, the linkage of ideas is carried out in a bizarre manner, unlike anything that occurred in childhood.[^91]

### Responsibility toward Possessors of a Wayward Imagination

Chapter 1 showed that eighteenth-century discourse identified certain groups as particularly vulnerable to disorders and flights of the imagination: workers, women, and children allegedly had a special propensity to flee the harsh demands of reality and to seek shelter in more congenial, imaginary worlds. Hence we should not be surprised to find that, once the Revolutionaries embarked upon the project of citizen-making through schooling the imagination, they not only addressed their efforts to the population at large but also acknowledged that certain groups, starting from a lower baseline of rationality, demanded special consideration and protection. Thus the Société des amis des noirs, lobbying during the early years of the Revolution for the abolition of the French slave trade and of slavery on French-owned Caribbean islands, leveled the accusation that the slave trade was nefarious in part because of its psychological dynamics. Its agents preyed on the African native, who was of weaker than average mental constitution and whose imagination was so susceptible to stimulation that he could be easily induced to act against his own best interests. Said the deputy Viefville des Essars in a speech to the Assembly in 1791:

> It is laughable to suggest that the slaves that we take from the coasts of Africa have all been condemned to torture or other such painful punishments. Let us be honest: we excite the desires of these simple men by all sorts of ruses, by a host of objects that we present to their eyes to seduce their imaginations. Thus we force these unfortunates, who otherwise have nothing to offer us, to make constant war on one another in order to procure persons to sell to us.

So crass, reprehensible, and effective was the psychological manipulation that undergirded the slave trade that African merchants frequently went so far as to sell their own children “when they have no other means of satisfying the passions that we have aroused in them and of which they would still be ignorant if they had not had the misfortune of knowing us.”[^92] Viefville spoke in the first person plural, taking “we” to mean not only white European slave traders but the societies that condoned them. He thus invited all his fellow deputies and fellow citizens to share in the blame for this unconscionable exploitation of psychological weakness.

The motif of the unevenly matched psychological contest can be found in much Revolutionary discourse, and the standard Revolutionary solution to the problem of hyperactive imaginations in flimsy mental constitutions is—as the central schools with their general grammar courses exemplify most perfectly—education. The nation had an obligation to fortify the mental faculties of all its citizens so that they would not be in the generic position of African natives yielding themselves up, with disastrous consequences, to clever people who appeal to their imaginations by means of their senses. A classic Revolutionary text setting forth this obligation is Condorcet’s Sketch for a Historical Picture of the Progress of the Human Mind (1793). The discovery of the doctrine of natural rights, says Condorcet, means that men no longer “dare to divide humanity into two races, the one fated to rule, the other to obey, the one to deceive, the other to be deceived.” He later restates this point in a favorite Enlightenment idiom, that of dupes and charlatans. A republican government can reasonably hope to attain among its citizenry not a complete equality of education or mental acuity but that adequate degree of equality that will enable every citizen

> to be no longer the dupe of those popular errors which torment man with superstitious fears and chimerical hopes; to defend himself against prejudice by the strength of his reason alone; and, finally, to escape the deceits of charlatans who would lay snares for his fortune, his health, his freedom of thought and his conscience. . . .

The duality between “dupes and charlatans, . . . clever men and men readily deceived” is, Condorcet informs us, a universal one, arising everywhere as a consequence of the naturally unequal abilities of human beings. But a government committed to the rights of man can, for all practical purposes, eradicate that duality, converting the difference between charlatans and dupes to that between “men of learning and upright men who know the value of learning without being dazzled by it.”[^93]

So, too, did a less lofty thinker, the lecturer and journalist Pinglin, find in an education in Condillac-style logic a protection of weaker minds from dupery and its painful sequelae. In Pinglin’s view, most people qualified as weaker minds. The average run of mankind was “naturally docile, trusting, credulous,” impressed by appearance, deluded even by figurative speech. Theirs was a condition of great vulnerability. When such a person “allows himself to be duped, he becomes misanthropic, no longer sees an honest man anywhere but believes himself surrounded by rascals. He takes his bad humor for philosophy. . . .”[^94] Hence the necessity of a course in logic with M. Pinglin, which would level the playing field between dupes and charlatans and create an effective, though imperfect, mental equality among members of the citizen body.

The same topos of the unevenly matched psychological contest between dupes and charlatans was part of the repertory of Louis-Marie La Reveillière-Lépaux, a minor Revolutionary politician who, after helping to draft the Constitution of 1795, was named to the five-man Directory that served as the executive branch of the new regime. At that juncture, he championed the survival of the republican festivals but wished to supplement them by an austere deistic religion, one utterly lacking the pomp and sensory appeal of Catholicism as well as its state support. The chief beneficiaries of this religion would be the popular classes, who would be saved by it from descent into dupery. Without it, “they will throw themselves into the crudest superstitions because they will always find charlatans to alarm their imaginations and profit at their expense.” The vulnerability of the people stood in stark contrast to the imperviousness of the “well-educated man accustomed to reflection.” Such a man “drew from his studies and from all the circumstances of his life . . . a rational love of order” that preserved his psychological autonomy and enabled him to “exercise all the social virtues without religious belief or worship.” But the multitude lacked this acquired psychological ballast; their minds were in chaotic flux. Unless provided by others with a fulcrum, “they will lose themselves in the surge of their ideas.”[^95]

### Sensationalism Reconsidered

The two chapters comprising Part I of this book have told a seemingly self-contained success story. Through the lens of the theory of sensationalist psychology, the growing pains of modernity were perceived and interpreted in eighteenth-century France as environmental changes threatening to overstimulate the mental faculty of imagination. Once the Revolution endorsed and actualized those changes, that same psychological theory became a scientific resource, deliberately mined for the purposes of stabilizing the new laissez-faire, republican polity—at once prudently containing individual imagination, cementing the social bond and infusing it with patriotism, and committing the citizenry to the egalitarian ideal that everyone should have the capacity for autonomous reasoning, that the nation should not be divided into charlatans and dupes.

But given the brevity of the sensationalist experiment in political culture, its success must be regarded as more logical than actual. On its own terms, it should have worked. It was, however, so short-lived that no one could know whether it actually worked and would continue to work over the long haul. The demise of the Directory and the dismantling of central schools and Revolutionary festivals signaled its decisive end. What remained was a dual legacy: a widely shared horror of the political instability that the Revolution had unleashed; and a belief that psychological theory could be pressed into the service of sociopolitical engineering.

At the same time, certain observers turned against the type of reasoning so powerfully exemplified in the Revolutionary psychological experiment. Revolutionary politicians had, after all, targeted a single faculty, the imagination. That they had adopted such a strategy evidenced a conception of the psyche in which the parts overshadowed the whole and could be readily detached from it. The Revolutionaries had, in a word, ignored the totality called the self. If psychological theory was to figure in the post-Revolutionary solution, this argument ran, then the very absence of self-talk in sensationalist psychological theory had to be seen as contributing to the problem.

### NOTES

[^1]: 1. “De la fête de la raison,” Les Révolutions de Paris 17, no. 215 (23–30 brumaire Year II): 210–18, quotations on pp. 214–15.

[^2]: 2. Ibid., p. 211, my italics.

[^3]: 3. Ibid., pp. 211, 215.

[^4]: 4. Already sanctioned by Enlightenment epistemology, neologism became a particularly common practice in France during the Revolution, when national regeneration seemed to require it; see, e.g., Charles-Frédéric Reinhard, Le néologiste français, ou vocabulaire portatif des mots les plus nouveaux de la langue française . . ., (n.p., 1796), Avant-Propos. For the distinction between its good and bad forms, called néologie and néologisme, respectively, see L.S. Mercier, Néologie, ou Vocabulaire des mots nouveaux . . ., 2 vols. (Paris: Moussard, Year XI-1801), 1: vi–vii. See also Sophia Rosenfeld, A Revolution in Language: The Problem of Signs in Late Eighteenth-Century France (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2001).

[^5]: 5. “Avis de l’éditeur,” in François Quesnay, Dialogues sur le commerce et sur les travaux des artisans in Discussions et développemens sur quelques-unes des notions de l’économie politique (Leyden: 1757), pp. 237–38.

[^6]: 6. Quesnay, Dialogues, pp. 251–53 and “Avis de l’éditeur,” p. 239.

[^7]: 7. Quesnay, Dialogues, pp. 373, 375, 377, 379.

[^8]: 8. The text of Les mannequins, conte ou histoire, comme l’on voudra can be found in Louis-François Métra, Correspondance secrète politique et littéraire, 18 vols. (London: J. Adamson, 1787–90), 3: 87–110.

[^9]: 9. Ibid., pp. 92, 94, 96.

[^10]: 10. Marquis de Rangoni to Condillac, 9 October 1776, in Jean Sgard, ed., Corpus Condillac (1714–1780) (Geneva: Slatkine, 1981), pp. 154–55.

[^11]: 11. Condillac, Le commerce et le gouvernement, in Oeuvres philosophiques de Condillac, ed. Georges Le Roy, 3 vols. (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1947–51), 2: 332–35.

[^12]: 12. Keith Michael Baker, Condorcet: From Natural Philosophy to Social Mathematics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975), pp. 111–12.

[^13]: 13. See the editor’s note to the “Discours préliminaire,” Cours d’études pour l’instruction du prince du Parme (1775) in Oeuvres philosophiques, 1: 397 n. 1.

[^14]: 14. Oeuvres philosophiques, 2: 242 n.

[^15]: 15. Ibid., 2: 402.

[^16]: 16. Ibid. On “epistemological modesty” see Baker, Condorcet, chap. 2.

[^17]: 17. Oeuvres philosophiques, 2: 402.

[^18]: 18. Ibid., p. 403, my italics. For more on error in Condillac, see David W. Bates, Enlightenment Aberrations: Error and Revolution in France (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2002).

[^19]: 19. “De la fête de la raison,” p. 214.

[^20]: 20. See Guillaume-François Le Trosne, De l’intérêt social, par rapport à la valeur, à la circulation, à l’industrie et au commerce intérieur et extérieur (Paris: Debure, 1777), p. 75–77, 80; and Nicolas Baudeau, “Observations économistes à M. l’abbé de Condillac,” Nouvelles éphémérides économiques, April–May 1776; reprinted in Auguste Lebeau, Condillac économiste (Paris: Guillaumin, 1903): 422–45, esp. 436, 438–42.

[^21]: 21. Baker, Condorcet, pp. 114–22, esp. p. 121, quotation on p. 122.

[^22]: 22. See Steven Kaplan, “Les corporations, les ‘faux ouvriers’ et le faubourg Saint-Antoine au XVIIIe siècle,” Annales E.S.C. (March–April 1988): 353–78.

[^23]: 23. AN: F12 654, “Mémoire des gardes de la communauté des teinturiers en soie, laine et fil de la ville de Rouen,” 13 October 1778; and “Extrait des avis . . . sur un mémoire qui a pour objet d’établir un sistème d’administration intermédiaire entre la stricte exécution des ancien règlemens et la liberté générale et indéfinie,” MS pp. 16–17. I learned of these archives in William M. Reddy, “The Structure of a Cultural Crisis: Thinking about Cloth in France Before and After the Revolution” in The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective, ed. Arjun Appadurai (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), pp. 261–84.

[^24]: 24. Mémoires de Condorcet sur la Révolution française, 2 vols. (Paris: Ponthieu, 1824), 2: 37–42, quotations on 40, my italics, and 42. On the career of Suard, see Robert Darnton, “The High Enlightenment and Low-Life of Literature in Pre-Revolutionary France,” Past and Present (May 1971): 81–115, esp. 82–85.

[^25]: 25. Honoré-Gabriel de Riquetti, Comte de Mirabeau, “Considérations sur l’ordre de Cincinnatus,” in Oeuvres de Mirabeau, 8 vols. (Paris: Lecointe et Pougin, 1834–35), 3: 323–426, esp. 326 for the quotation, 333, 336.

[^26]: 26. Ibid., pp. 339–40, 342–43.

[^27]: 27. Mirabeau, Travail sur l’éducation publique trouvé dans les papiers de Mirabeau l’ainé, ed. P.-J.-G. Cabanis (Paris: Impr. nationale, 1791), pp. 82–83.

[^28]: 28. Ibid., pp. 75, 81, 85, 97, 99.

[^29]: 29. “Avertissement,” in ibid., p. 3 n. 1.

[^30]: 30. These tallies come from the ARTFL database.

[^31]: 31. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Emile, ou de l’Education, in Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Oeuvres complètes, ed., Bernard Gagnebin and Marcel Raymond, 4 vols. (Paris: Gallimard/Pléiade, 1959–69) 4: 303–5, quotation on 305.

[^32]: 32. Ibid., p. 384.

[^33]: 33. See Madame de Genlis, Adèle et Théodore, ou Lettres sur l’éducation, 6th ed., 4 vols. (Paris: Lecointe et Durey, 1822) 1: 117, 191. My thanks to Julia Douthwaite for calling this text to my attention; she discusses it in her The Wild Girl, Natural Man, and the Monster: Dangerous Experiments in the Age of the Enlightenment (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002), pp. 145–50.

[^34]: 34. Emile, pp. 488, 502–3, 506, 517.

[^35]: 35. Ibid., pp. 645, 647, 860, my italics.

[^36]: 36. Mirabeau, Travail sur l’éducation publique, p. 76.

[^37]: 37. Louis Joubert (de l’Hérault), Opinion sur le projet . . . sur l’organisation des écoles primaires (Paris: Impr. nationale, Year VII), p. 3. The whole quotation appears in italics in the original.

[^38]: 38. The path-breaking work on the festivals is Mona Ozouf, Festivals and the French Revolution (Fr. ed. 1976), trans. Alan Sheridan (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988). On these points of chronology, see esp. pp. 61, 106.

[^39]: 39. See Alain-Charles Gruber, Les grands fêtes et leurs décors à l’époque de Louis XVI (Geneva: Droz, 1972), esp. pp. 149–57.

[^40]: 40. Ozouf, Festivals, pp. 129, 200.

[^41]: 41. Raymond Barennes, Opinion sur la résolution du 6 thermidor, relative aux fêtes décadaires (Paris: Impr. nationale, Year VI), pp. 5–6.

[^42]: 42. For the first quotation, see François-Antoine Boissy d’Anglas, Essai sur les fêtes nationales, suivi de quelques idées sur les arts et sur la nécessité de les encourager (Paris: Impr. polyglotte, Year II), p. 37; for the second, see Joubert, “Opinion,” pp. 3–4. For a similar view, see Joseph Eschassériaux l’aîné, Réflexions et projet de décret sur les fêtes décadaires (Paris: Impr. nationale, Year III), p. 2.

[^43]: 43. Antoine-Christophe Merlin (de Thionville), Opinion sur les fêtes nationales (Paris: Impr. nationale, Year III), pp. 19–20.

[^44]: 44. AN: F 1C V Seine 1, “Rapport au nom du Comité des besoins,” in Conseil général de la Seine, Procès verbaux, an VII–an XI, pp. 164–201. See the section entitled “Des fêtes nationales et de ce qu’il conviendrait de faire pour leur imprimer un plus grand caractère . . .,” pp. 188–96, esp. pp. 188–90.

[^45]: 45. See Henri Grégoire, “Rapport sur la nécessité et les moyens d’anéantir les patois et d’universaliser l’usage de la langue française,” presented to the Convention on 16 prairial Year II; reprinted in Michel de Certeau, Dominique Julia, and Jacques Revel, Une politique de la langue: La Révolution française et les patois (Paris: Gallimard, 1975), pp. 300–317, esp. 304–5 and, for citation of Condillac, 314.

[^46]: 46. Grégoire, Rapport et projet de décret . . . sur les costumes des législateurs et des autres fonctionnaires publics (Paris: Impr. nationale, Year III), pp. 7–10.

[^47]: 47. Ibid., p. 2. Grégoire’s bill is discussed in the context of general Revolutionary policy on clothing in Lynn Hunt, Politics, Culture and Class in the French Revolution (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984), pp. 77–80.

[^48]: 48. Grégoire, Systême de dénominations topographiques pour les places, rues, quais, etc. de toutes les communes de la République (Paris: Impr. nationale, n.d.), pp. 2–4, 10. See also James A. Leith, Space and Revolution: Projects for Monuments, Squares and Public Buildings in France, 1789–1799 (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1991), pp. 120–21 and chap. 7, and Priscilla Parkhurst Ferguson, Paris as Revolution: Writing the Nineteenth-Century City (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994), pp. 26–30.

[^49]: 49. Leith, Space and Revolution, pp. 27–30. See also Teisserenc, Géographie parisienne, en forme de dictionnaire (Paris, 1754).

[^50]: 50. Fabre d’Eglantine, L’Etude de la nature: Poème à M. le comte de Buffon (London, 1783), pp. 1–2.

[^51]: 51. Report of Philippe Fabre d’Eglantine, 24 October 1793, in Procès-verbaux du Comité d’instruction publique de la Convention nationale, ed. J. Guillaume, 7 vols. (Paris: Impri. nationale, 1891–1959), 2: 697–706, esp. 697– 701.

[^52]: 52. Maximilien Robespierre, “Report on the Principles of Political Morality,” in Keith Michael Baker, ed., The Old Regime and the French Revolution (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987), pp. 368–84, 369 for the quotation.

[^53]: 53. “Discours préliminaire” to Cours d’études pour l’instruction du prince de Parme, in Oeuvres philosophiques, 1: 398.

[^54]: 54. R. R. Palmer, The Improvement of Humanity: Education and the French Revolution (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985), pp. 242–43.

[^55]: 55. On this leitmotif, see L. Pearce Williams, “Science, Education, and the French Revolution,” Isis 44 (1953): 311–30, esp. 314–18.

[^56]: 56. AN: F17 1341B, letter of Guilliot, professor of drawing at the central school of the Pas de Calais, 24 floréal Year VII.

[^57]: 57. AN: F17 1344/28.

[^58]: 58. The name resurfaced in scholarly discourse when Michel Foucault, relying heavily on the textbooks of the central schools, used it to mean the codification of the characteristic attitude toward language and knowledge of the so-called classical episteme of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. See The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences (New York: Vintage, 1973), pp. 81–92.

[^59]: 59. AN: F17 1344/2, response of Antoine Magin to question 9 of the ministerial circular.

[^60]: 60. AN: F17 1344/2, response of Joseph Cazalis to the ministerial circular, pp. 3–4.

[^61]: 61. See, e.g., AN: F17 1344/8, Dossier, Hautes-Alpes, letter of 13 brumaire Year V.

[^62]: 62. See, e.g., AN: F17 1344/2, Labbey, “Cours de grammaire-générale,” MS dated 8 brumaire Year VIII; letter of Gattel to minister of interior, 15 vendémiaire Year VIII; letter of Descoles to minister of interior, 1 prairial Year VII.

[^63]: 63. AN: F17 1344/3, Thiébault, “De l’Enseignement de la grammaire générale dans les écoles centrales,” MS pp. 2–3.

[^64]: 64. AN: F17 1344/2, Gattel to minister of interior, 1 prairial Year VII. On Gattel as teacher of Stendhal, see Stendhal, La vie de Henry Brulard, in Oeuvres intimes, ed. V. Del Litto, 2 vols. (Paris: Gallimard/Pléiade, 1981), 1: chap. 22, “Ecole centrale,” esp. pp. 741–430.

[^65]: 65. See AN: F17 1339, “Réponses à la circulaire du 20 floréal Year VII, Cours de grammaire générale.” Many said nothing at all about their sources, and some mentioned other authors—especially Locke, Court de Gébelin, Dumarsais, Bauzée, and Sicard—in addition to or instead of Condillac. For purposes of this tally I excluded those departments outside the hexagon that had been annexed to France during the Revolutionary wars.

[^66]: 66. Ibid., Entry #60 for the Department of the Seine; the remark was made by Duhamel, professor of general grammar at the Paris central school of the Pantheon.

[^67]: 67. AN: F17 1344/2, reply of Durand (Department of the Ain) to the ministerial circular.

[^68]: 68. AN: F17 1339 Dossier 20, “Extrait du procès verbal du Conseil d’instruction publique, 18 thermidor an VII,” p. 11, discussion of one Citizen Duret.

[^69]: 69. AN: F17 1344/3, reply to the ministerial circular of the Year VII; printed poster entitled “Département de Maine-et-Loire. Ecole centrale: Cours de Botanique”; and letter of Merlet-Laboulaye to minister of interior, 29 vendémiaire Year VIII.

[^70]: 70. See L. W. B. Brockliss, French Higher Education in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries: A Cultural History (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987), pp. 215–16.

[^71]: 71. On these points, see Palmer, Improvement of Humanity, pp. 15, 25, 49–51, 106–7; and Jean de Viguerie, Une oeuvre scolaire sous l’Ancien Régime: Les Pères de la Doctrine Chrétiennes en France et en Italie, 1592–1792 (Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne, 1976), pp. 559–64, 630.

[^72]: 72. AN: F17 1344/3, response of Ortolan to the ministerial circular of the Year VII and a large printed poster entitled, “Prospectus. Ouverture d’un cours privé de langue française et italienne,” also dated Year VII.

[^73]: 73. AN: F17 1344/2, response of Magin to the ministerial circular of the Year VII.

[^74]: 74. Stendhal, Vie de Henry Brulard, in Oeuvres intimes, 1: 738, 742.

[^75]: 75. Claude Désirat and Tristan Hordé, “La fabrique aux élites: théories et pratiques de la grammaire génerale dans les écoles centrales,” Annales historiques de la révolution française 53 (1981): 61–88.

[^76]: 76. Destutt de Tracy, “Observations sur le système actuel d’instruction publique” (1801). Reprinted in Elémens d’Idéologie, pt. 3, vol. 2 (Paris: Lévi, 1825), 331–82, quotation on p. 378.

[^77]: 77. Palmer, Improvement of Humanity, p. 248. This is Palmer’s conclusion on the basis of sporadic data. It is notable, for example, that the prize winners at the central school of Besançon included the sons of a hairdresser, a locksmith, and a carpenter.

[^78]: 78. AN: F17 1344/2, letter to minister of interior dated 1 prairial Year VII.

[^79]: 79. AN: F17 1344/3, poster cited in n. 72, earlier.

[^80]: 80. AN: F17 1344/3, letter to minister of interior.

[^81]: 81. Destutt de Tracy, “Observations sur le système actuel d’instruction publique,” pp. 378, 381. There would be, Destutt opined, not only a dilution in the subject matter but also a time lag (while the knowledge was being perfected and the abrégés drawn up) before the poor were instructed in it.

[^82]: 82. This handbill is bound together with the BN copy of F. Pinglin, Nouveau cours de logique, ou l’art de raisonner réduit à un seul principe, et mis à la portée de tous les âges, et de tous les esprits (n.p.: Impr. du Journal, n.d.).

[^83]: 83. See “Prospectus” to L’Ami des campagnes, par une société de gens de lettres et rédigé par F. Pinglin, bound in the BN copy of vol. 1 (15 prairial Year VIII-15 frimaire Year XI). Installments of the sensationalist treatise, “Education intellectuelle: Premiers développemens de l’esprit,” appear in 1: 65–67, 73–76, 129–31, 137–40, 161–62, 176–79, 193–95, 225–27, 377–80, 392–96, 433–34. Like Pinglin’s Nouveau cours, this text contains areas of dissent from Condillac.

[^84]: 84. Pinglin, Ami des campagnes, vol. 1, no. 9.

[^85]: 85. Laurent-Pierre Berenger, Esprit de Mably et de Condillac relativement à la morale et à la politique, vol. 2:, Esprit de Condillac (Grenoble: Le Jay, 1789).

[^86]: 86. Citoyen B***, L’Esprit de Condillac, ou principes de raison et de morale extraits des ouvrages de ce philosophe (Paris: Chez les marchands des nouveautés, Year III).

[^87]: 87. For that wish, see Esprit de Condillac, “Notice sur M. l’abbé de Condillac,” p. 4; on Berenger, see the Dictionnaire de biographie française.

[^88]: 88. AN: F17 1344/9, Dossier: Ariège, printed letter, “L’Administration centrale du département de l’Ariège à ses concitoyens,” dated 16 germinal Year VI, my italics.

[^89]: 89. Thiébault, “De l’enseignement de la grammaire générale,” MS pp. 4–5.

[^90]: 90. Dieudonné Thiébault, Grammaire philosophique, ou la métaphysique, la logique et la grammaire, réunies en un seul corps de doctrine, 2 vols. (Paris: Courcier, Year XI-1802), Preface, 1: iii–iv.

[^91]: 91. AN: F17 1344/2, Magin, professor of general grammar at the central school of the Ardennes, “Compte rendu pour l’enseignement du cours de grammaire génerale pendant l’an sept,” my italics.

[^92]: 92. Jean-Louis Viefville des Essars, Discours et projet de loi pour l’affranchissement des nègres, ou l’adoucissement de leur régime, et réponse aux objections des colons (Paris: Impr. nationale, n.d. [1791]), pp. 30–31.

[^93]: 93. Condorcet, “Sketch for a Historical Picture of the Progress of the Human Mind,” in Keith Michael Baker, ed., Condorcet: Selected Writings (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1976), 210–82, quotations from pp. 223, 265–66, my italics.

[^94]: 94. Pinglin, Nouveau cours, no. 1., pp. 1–2. The same relation between dupery and misanthropy is sketched out in F. Pinglin, Cours de logique à l’usage des écoles nationales, ou l’art d’éviter l’erreur, mis à la portée du plus grand nombre (Paris: Huzard, Year VI), p. 18.

[^95]: 95. Louis-Marie Reveillière-Lépaux, Réflexions sur le culte, sur les cérémonies civiles et sur les fêtes nationales (Paris: Jansen, Year V), pp. 4–5, my italics.
