## 3 Is There a Self in This Mental Apparatus?

The difficult thing is forming the moi.

Sieyès, 1773

No one could have been more committed to the psychology of Condillac than the minor historical figure Dieudonné Thiébault, who made a cameo appearance in Chapter 2. A professor of general grammar at a Paris central school under the Directory, Thiébault had earlier done a stint in Berlin teaching the sensationalist epistemology at a new school personally founded by Frederick the Great to foster the spread of enlightenment in his domains. Hence it is of no little moment that, addressing the French fathers who had sent their sons to the central schools in the Year XI (1802), he listed among the goals of secondary education that the students become “accustomed to that inner life (vie intérieure) that assures us of so many resources in times of trouble and vexation,” that they “learn to descend into their own thoughts and to search deeply (fouiller) in their heads, everyone’s richest and most fecund book, the most important for all of us to study.”[^1] In other words, Thiébault, the veritable ideal type of the sensationalist psychologist, referred to the psychic apparatus by invoking the metaphors of depth, excavation, and interiority that we typically associate with that entity called the self, indeed with a highly elaborated, modern version of that entity.[^2] Such a self was, we might infer, part and parcel of sensationalist psychology, a psychic space grounded and secured by its tenets.

But in fact the relationship between the self and sensationalist psychology was far more complicated than Thiébault’s casual remarks intimated. Misgivings about that relationship clouded discussions of sensationalism, prompting certain contemporaries to doubt the adequacy of the sensationalist model of the mind for the purposes they wished it to serve. This chapter will survey the early installments of those debates, thus marking the transition to Part II of this book by pushing the concept of the self into the foreground of the story. Spanning the long period from the 1690s to the 1820s, the chapter begins with the dawning recognition that the newly minted theory of sensationalism might not be entirely hospitable to the entity that John Locke, undertaking a bit of influential neologism, called a “self”; it ends with Maine de Biran, who, in a series of highly original manuscripts, abandoned sensationalism for the express purpose of accommodating a robust self. The chapter thus takes up the theme, highlighted in the Introduction to this book, of the gap between psychological interiority in general and self-talk as a particular subset of it.

Two analytically separate questions are in play in a consideration of the relationship of sensationalism to the self. The first is whether belief in the principles of sensationalist psychology gave adherents a particular optic through which to experience psychic inwardness—both their own and, by extension, that of their fellows. Was there, in other words, a distinctively sensationalist encounter with what I have called in the Introduction the individuated mental stuff? Material cited in Chapter 2 has already suggested an affirmative answer to that question. In inventing a new republican culture replete with civic festivals, a revamped calendar, and renamed city streets, the Revolutionaries had conceptualized the individual citizen along sensationalist lines. They postulated a being whose convictions could be shaped by means of selective sensory bombardment, whose psyche, sensitive to the point of quivering, existed (for good or ill) in a state of porous exchange with the environment.

A characteristically sensationalist confrontation with the individuated mental stuff can also be found, to cite just two more examples, in the writings of the Revolutionary politician La Reveillière-Lépaux and the novelist Stendhal. La Reveillière was entirely typical of his confreres in his employment of the rhetoric of sensationalist psychology to argue for the efficacy of the national festivals[^3] and, as discussed in Chapter 2, to explain the difference between charlatans and dupes. Less typically, he also left behind evidence of his application of that same psychology to himself. His memoirs revealed that he had always “been inclined to a deep melancholy which . . . has given my moral feelings a compelling force” and that the faculty of imagination was likewise prominent in his mental life, having consistently “produced singular effects on me.” Recalling an unshakable conviction, acquired during a childhood promenade around the chateau of Angers, that he could see the living bodies of St. John the Baptist and the lamb, he mentioned the episode as an instance of the way “our senses are abused by that remarkable faculty called imagination.”[^4] To such episodes he traced his anticlerical politics and his belief in psychological engineering. Firsthand experience of the potent combination of melancholy and overactive imagination that Condillac had flagged as undermining an individual’s ability to distinguish fact from fantasy alerted him to the collective problem posed by religion:

> I have been very incorrectly labeled an enemy of all religion. Born, perhaps unfortunately, with an excessive sensibility, endowed with an active imagination, and prone to a deep and chronic melancholy, how could I not have been susceptible to religious ideas? Religious feeling was never foreign to me. But if I have a warm heart and a passionate expressiveness, I have a cool head, and that has perhaps protected me from the errors into which dispositions like mine are often led.[^5]

The novelist Stendhal, who retrospectively praised the instruction in Condillac he had received at the central school of Grenoble, used sensationalism as a resource in creating his literary characters. The first time that the young, unpolished Julien Sorel attempts to speak from his heart to Madame de Rênal, the mistress of the house in which he serves as tutor, he effusively describes surgical operations whose gory details cause his beloved lady to cringe. Stendhal comments that Julien’s outlandish conduct derived quite logically from the fact that the only person whom he had ever before addressed with complete sincerity was his mentor, a surgeon in the Napoleonic army, who often regaled him with stories of his wartime ministrations to wounded soldiers. Hence surgery automatically sprang to Julien’s mind as an appropriate topic for a conversation in which no defensive masks or postures would intervene between him and his interlocutor. Julien becomes a figure of fun because the mechanical principles of association that invariably guide human thought processes effectively sabotage his romantic intentions.[^6] And Julien was a representative instance of the Stendhalian species: un mouvement machinal always governed the lover’s declarations to the beloved, Stendhal announced in his “book of idéologie,” the nonfictional De l’amour (1822).[^7] Indeed the trope most characteristic of Stendhal’s prose—irony—may be enmeshed in his sensationalist presuppositions, which routinely drew his attention to the disjuncture between the loftiness and delicacy of human aspiration and the coarsely mechanical and corporeal instrument of thought upon which all human beings necessarily rely.[^8]

The ability of sensationalism to provide contemporaries with a distinctive psychological language, and hence a distinctively inflected experience of mental inwardness, thus seems clear. But a second, more stringent question can be posed—and, indeed, was posed at the time. What is the overall structure of the individuated mental stuff when it is described by means of the language of sensationalism? Does the mental apparatus postulated by sensationalism actually contain a self? And if so, is it a true self (sturdy, unitary) or a pallid simulacrum of a self (flimsy, fragmented)? This is a very different question from the first one. A theory can facilitate psychological inwardness and give it a characteristic stamp without forcefully conceptualizing the individuated mental stuff as a centered totality. Inwardness can be a pointillist attitude; it can focus on a specific mental trait or mental conflict, or a specific mental faculty like imagination, while ignoring or leaving blurry the contours of the mental entity as a whole. Individuals can be habitués of the inner life without seriously engaging in self-talk.

Certainly the cases of La Reveillière-Lépaux, Stendhal’s Julien Sorel, and the citizens envisioned by the architects of republican political culture all suggest that a psychic apparatus conceived on sensationalist lines had conspicuous weaknesses and vulnerabilities, that it lacked protective armor and full control over its processes—that it was, in a word, disaggregated.[^9] But the question of what kind of self was consonant with sensationalism did not initially arise from pondering concrete exemplars such as these. It arose rather as a highly abstract, philosophical investigation in the pages of Locke’s An Essay on Human Understanding, the late seventeenth-century treatise that crystallized the sensationalist paradigm. In that form it occupied philosophers intermittently for a good two centuries, becoming nothing less than one of the classic questions of modern Western philosophy as well as a standard reference point for many of the psychological theorists who figure in this book. To be sure, the question generated a rarefied, technical disputation among philosophers that most often seemed irrelevant to mundane concerns. Thus one late twentieth-century analytic philosopher, crediting Locke with setting the terms of the modern debate on personal identity, could attribute Locke’s pioneering role in this regard to “his vital insight that different sortal terms convey different criteria of identity.”[^10] But it is not such technical glosses on the debate that ultimately interest me here. Rather, as the eighteenth- and especially nineteenth-century developments traced in this book indicate, the appearance of Locke’s question on the horizon of philosophy heralded a sea-change of some consequence for ordinary people: the increasing salience of the self as an everyday category. It is precisely one of the themes of this book that (at least in the historical context under discussion here) the propositions of philosophical psychology had, through a series of institutional mediations, definite repercussions on lived experience.

### The Lockean Self and Its Critics

Locke’s question was originally a question posed to him by his friend William Molyneux. In a letter of 1693 replying to Locke’s request for “any new heads from logick or metaphysicks to be inserted” in the forthcoming edition of the Essay, Molyneux urged that a discussion of what he called the principium individuationis—the distinct, indivisible nature of our personal mental stuff—be included.[^11] That small historical datum demonstrates on its own the gap that can exist between turning inward and engaging in self-talk. Apparently the consummately inward-turning thinker, who in the first edition of his Essay (1690) had painstakingly derived the numerous features of a human mind from sensationalist suppositions, had never thought to ask how he could account for a self in his model. Only as a result of his friend’s intervention did the now celebrated chapter “Of Identity and Diversity” make its appearance in the second edition of 1694.

In that chapter Locke sizes up the implications for the status of the human person of his jettisoning of Cartesianism. If, he asks in effect, we discard the Cartesian contention that the indivisibility of the self or thinking substance is a self-evident, a priori truth and postulate instead that all our mental contents are derived from a combination of discrete sensory impressions and our mind’s ability to reflect on its own operations, what is the ground of selfhood, of (in Locke’s words) the “sameness of a rational Being” that persists through space and time?[^12] Why should a human psychic apparatus constructed bit by bit from atomistic sensations ever constitute or house that stable, unitary entity entitled to the name of self?

In a long and rambling argument (Book 2, Chapter 27, is nothing if not a difficult text), Locke located the sought-after ground of selfhood in a combination of consciousness and memory. We cannot think, feel, sense, or will without being reflexively aware that we do so, he asserted, and the consciousness inevitably accompanying our mental processes “makes every one to be, what he calls self; and thereby distinguishes himself from all other thinking things, [and] in this alone consists personal Identity.” Still, in order to ensure this identity, memory must be added to consciousness because, as Locke readily conceded, consciousness is discontinuous, “being interrupted always by forgetfulness, there being no moment of our Lives wherein we have the whole train of our past Actions before our Eyes in one view.” Sometimes sheer absorption in present thoughts momentarily obliterates our awareness of our past selves; once a day consciousness itself is suspended in sleep. Hence memory must be enlisted to fill in the gaps and restore that unbroken continuity of consciousness to which Locke gave the name of self.[^13]

But Locke probed further, submitting as a more strenuous objection to the coherence of the concept of selfhood the possibility that certain portions of lived experience might be lost beyond retrieval—those, for example, that occur when an individual is drunk or in a state of somnambulism. Locke now salvaged his basic contention about the persistence of the self through recourse to what he termed a “forensick” conception. A court of law, he said, lacks any sure means of assessing the authenticity of a plea that an accused should be found not guilty for reason of drunkenness or sleepwalking. Hence convention deems that the court avoid the issue entirely, ignoring any alleged gap in consciousness and, hence, any lapse in moral responsibility attendant upon it, and punishing the person in question on the purely factual basis of the crime committed by his hand. But this pragmatic arrangement lasts only as long as our temporal existence, becoming irrelevant on the Day of Judgment, “wherein the Secrets of all Hearts shall be laid open . . . [and] no one shall be made to answer for what he knows nothing of; but shall receive his Doom, his Conscience accusing or excusing him.” Presumably, then, the postulation of the unity of the self was for Locke a necessary expedient to sustain the concept of moral responsibility in daily life in face of the ultimate imperfection of our terrestrial knowledge about other people’s states of consciousness.[^14] Locke had thus accurately pinpointed morality as a major area of concern to himself and to consumers of his psychology more generally: it was to ensure moral behavior that he believed a unified self indispensable.

As tentative and full of loose ends as this winding argument might seem, Locke audaciously presented it in the Essay as definitive, laying all doubts to rest. Not surprisingly, however, his claim that a stable and coherent self could have its genesis solely in sensation and reflection soon met with a barrage of criticism. In Britain, Bishop Joseph Butler and Thomas Reid attacked Locke’s argument as circular, presupposing what it allegedly proved by defining personal identity as consciousness of personal identity.[^15] In his Treatise of Human Nature (1739–40) David Hume began by noting, with historical acuity, the brouhaha that had only recently surrounded personal identity: it had become, he wrote, a “great a question in philosophy, especially of late years in England, where all the abstruser sciences are study’d with a peculiar ardour and application.” He went on to offer a more elaborate critique of Locke than had Butler and Reid—and one all the more devastating because, unlike those two earlier critics, he shared Locke’s sensationalist epistemology.

Postulating that there “must be some one impression, that gives rise to every real idea,” Hume argued that no such single impression could possibly be found to undergird the idea of a self. Ordinary reflection revealed that far from being unitary creatures who are “every moment intimately conscious of what we call our SELF,” we are instead “nothing but a bundle or collection of different perceptions, which succeed each other with an inconceivable rapidity, and are in a perpetual flux and movement.” Hume therefore concluded that the self was a “fiction” or “artifice.” As such, it was a construction of that most unreliable of human mental faculties, the imagination, here aided by our characteristically sloppy perceptual processes, which tended to ignore slight differences between objects and to register sameness where none existed.[^16] Hume’s argument bears a family resemblance to that of the critics of Quesnay whom we encountered in Chapter 2. A new scientific system—be it political economy or sensationalist psychology—that is supposed, by dint of its remade and well-made language, to elude customary error and provide reliable knowledge is turned on its head and exposed as a product of error-prone imagination.

In France, some of Locke’s earliest readers responded to his argument for personal identity in what is to modern ears a surprising register. Accepting the proof at face value, they lauded the chapter added to the second edition of the Essay because it showed sensationalism to be fundamentally consistent with the Christian doctrine of the resurrection of the flesh![^17] More usual, however, was the diametrically opposite reaction: a critique of the Lockean self undertaken by Catholic Cartesians intent on exposing the immoral and atheistic implications of sensationalism.[^18] Preaching to the converted, these critics tended to be more declamatory than analytic. Their main point was that a sensationalist epistemology could never satisfactorily ground a self recognizable as such to a Catholic. Hence recourse to a philosophy that postulated a self given all at once as a spiritual substance, instead of being assembled serially from material sensations, was necessary.

The Reverend Father Hayer readily admitted that the alleged unity of physical bodies was “only an abstraction of our minds.” But, he continued, in the essentially spiritual creature that is a human being, “we find a really and substantially indivisible center, where everything that interests man is brought back to unity.” And how, one might ask, do we find this center, which Hayer called the moi? Hayer’s facile answer is that the situation simply could not be otherwise. “If for this unique self (moi) we substituted a multitude of selves, what strange confusion would result!” The hypothetical multiple individual would be like an “anarchical society” composed of isolated, self-absorbed parts functioning as wholes, each in perfect ignorance of the needs of the others.[^19]

Hayer went on to invoke other so-called proofs of the unified and spiritual nature of the human moi, some of which relied—as was typical of this mode of Catholic-Cartesian apologetic—on the self-evidence of introspective experience. (“Having retreated into a pleasant solitude, solely occupied with the desire of knowing myself, I begin to consider with the eyes of my soul, my soul itself. That is to say, my moi, folding back upon itself, . . . contemplates itself. . . .”)[^20] Introspection and the psychic reality to which it irrefutably bears witness were also at the heart of the abbé de Lignac’s multivolume attack on the “doctrine of Locke” and its theological implications. In his preface, in which he also states his intention to enlist contemporary philosophy to vindicate the wisdom of the Church Fathers, Lignac explains and justifies his confident, declamatory tone. “Just as a witness ought to be firm when, before the court, he makes a deposition concerning what he has seen, . . . so ought I to refrain from weighing pros and cons or appearing to have the slightest doubt about the verities I discover.”[^21] Lignac gave his book a title consonant with that motif: he called it “Testimony of the sens intime.”

Lignac’s role as an apologist was more complicated than that of Hayer because, as he confides to the reader much later in the book, he had once seriously flirted with Locke’s argument. He had believed that the âme could be justly compared to a tabula rasa or a “canvas prepared by the Painter for painting whatever it pleased him to imagine,” that the soul was in fact “a pure capacity suitable for receiving any sentiment or thought.” He had gone so far as to accept Locke’s characterization of sleep as an authentic interruption of the consciousness required to sustain personal identity. But the fatal flaws of the Lockean position eventually became clear to him as a Catholic. He realized that a group of simple, indivisible parts, each sensing its own “numerical identity”—Lignac is apparently referring here to the discrete sensory impingements postulated by Locke—would cast doubt on personal identity because it would contain “nothing that would sense the numerical identity of the mass.” Armed with this understanding, he then refuted Locke by affirming that the sens intime, the mental attribute roughly equivalent to what Locke called reflection, did not operate (as Locke’s reflection did) by adding up discrete sensations; it did not construct personal identity by a process of assemblage. Rather it apprehended all at once and as a self-evident whole the invariable spiritual substance that was the soul and that served as the stable foundation of all a person’s multifarious thoughts, sensations, and affections.

The key to Lignac’s refutation was the distinction between Lockean reflection and the sens intime, between the sensationalist’s perception and addition of atomistic parts and his own apprehension of the whole. Lignac knew that the sens intime functioned in this holistic manner through his introspective experience of it, which he supposed was representative of the experience of mankind in general. (“If this experience is peculiar to me, I am wrong in proposing it to the public as the sole means of knowing the essence of the soul; but if it is common to me and all other men. . . .”) Once he had nailed down the sens intime in this way, Locke’s objections about sleep as an interruption of consciousness vanished. He realized that, although he experienced deep sleep or even religious meditation as a void (dénuement) “similar to the state of death,” he in fact conserved upon awakening a memory of that “inert” interval of time and hence knew himself to be the same person who had lived through it. As Lignac explains this basic difference between Locke’s dubious power of reflection and his own sens intime, from which the principles of Catholic orthodoxy happily flow, “I sense myself perceiving while perceiving something, as Locke says. But what Locke does not say is that, when perceiving the letters that I am now tracing, I sense myself as the same being who received his first writing lessons so many years ago.”[^22]

### Condillac and the Minimalist Self

While Locke, once alerted by Molyneux, recognized the magnitude of the problem of personal identity for the sensationalist epistemology and spun out a long and tortuous argument attempting to resolve it, his French successor, dependent on Locke in so many other ways, displayed an odd and surprising nonchalance about the unity of the self. In fact, Condillac’s first psychological treatise, the Essai sur l’origine des connaissances humaines (1746), mentioned the self only in passing. In the course of describing the generation of the various mental operations from the primal capacity for sensation, Condillac paused to observe that the operation of reminiscence enables us to preserve the sequential linkage between perceptions that we have experienced at different moments in time. As such, he opined, reminiscence is a necessary condition for a persisting, unified self. “If this linkage were each night interrupted, I would so to speak begin life anew each day, and no one could convince me that today’s moi was the moi of the day before.” Condillac then went on to analyze two distinct aspects of reminiscence, one that “makes us recognize our own being,” the other that “makes us recognize the perceptions that are there repeated.” The first of those two phrases thus tersely and elliptically predicated selfhood on memory, apparently identifying memory as its sufficient condition. Yet Condillac failed to acknowledge the immensity of that claim, which went even farther than Locke’s comparable one.[^23] Invoking the dual principles of sensation and reflection to account for the contents of a fully developed mind, Locke based the self on both memory (construed as a direct development of sensation) and reflection. Condillac aimed at greater parsimony and, by attributing the invention of linguistic signs to the elementary mental faculties, sought to make do with sensation alone.[^24] Hence Condillac’s minimalist self relied solely on memory.

By the time of his second psychological treatise, the Traité des sensations (1754), Condillac was somewhat more deliberate in his treatment of the self, but he still disposed of that topic promptly and without obvious intellectual agony. Condillac’s hypothetical case history of a statue gradually endowed with each of the five senses included, in Book I (in which the statue’s exclusive sensory organ is his nose), a succinct chapter entitled “Of the Moi, or of the Personality of a Man Limited to the Sense of Smell.” Here once again, selfhood and memory are tightly bound. The statue, we are told, could not say “I” at the moment when it first experienced an odor. “Insofar as a being does not change, it exists without any folding back on itself. But insofar as it changes, it judges that it is still in some manner the same as it previously was, and it says moi.” Condillac then recasts this point in a stunningly pared down definition of the self: the “moi is nothing but the collection of the sensations that [the statue or person] experiences and of those that memory recalls to it. In a word, it is the simultaneous consciousness of what [the statue or person] is and the memory of what it was.”[^25]

Condillac thus seemed oblivious to the controversy swirling around Locke’s concept of personal identity, curiously detached from the concerns that so passionately exercised others in his intellectual community. He engaged neither the aggressive French Catholic critics of that concept nor Hume, whose Treatise was not translated into French during the eighteenth century.[^26] With respect to the former, he seems to have shied away from polemics on religious matters. His reply to Lignac’s 1756 critique of his Traité des animaux, for example, counsels the Catholic apologist simply to accept or reject a philosophical argument on its internal merits, bracketing its doctrinal consequences. A valid argument, Condillac promises, will never harbor danger for religion because “Truth cannot be contrary to truth.”[^27]

With respect to Hume, whose Treatise he probably never read, Condillac is in the odd, almost perverse position of appearing to side with Locke about the cogency of a self founded on sensations while sounding a great deal like Locke’s Scottish detractor. The very same image of the mind as a “collection” of fleeting sensations and perceptions, which Hume deliberately employs to damn Locke’s theory of personal identity, is employed by Condillac in a completely neutral register, simply to describe the moi as Condillac believes it is, without commentary on the cogency or absurdity of the concept. For Hume, the presumed fact that the self is nothing but an arbitrary collection of sensations and their by-products reveals the fictive nature and hence the scandalous bankruptcy of Locke’s claims about personal identity. But for Condillac, the self as an empty space, as the theatrical stage (to use Hume’s metaphor)[^28] where a succession of sensory events are momentarily enacted, seems all the self that he could ever envision. Condillac evinces no discomfort, certainly no horror, with the flimsiness and lack of grandeur of such a self. He behaves much like the intrepid truth seeker, the unflinching philosopher committed to exploring the limits of human knowledge at any cost, that he would later depict in his reply to Lignac.

Somewhat comically, Condillac’s only affirmation of the unity of the moi occurred not in his treatises on the human psychic apparatus, where it logically belonged, but in their bestial analogue, the Traité des animaux (1755). There he seems to have inadvertently backed into such an affirmation in the course of criticizing his sometime rival, the comte de Buffon. Known today as a taxonomist of the animal kingdom, Buffon had in his own era an additional reputation as a psychologist. In the Discours sur la nature des animaux (1753) that opens the fourth volume of his Histoire naturelle, he even offered a full-blown definition of the moi—an idiosyncratic definition blending Cartesian and sensationalist elements.[^29] Careful to reserve possession of a moi to humans even though he granted animals consciousness of their own existence, Buffon followed the sensationalists in binding selfhood closely to memory. Beasts are conscious only of their present existence, he said, while the specifically human moi has a decisive temporal element, complementing the animals’ perpetual present with “memory of our past existence.” But Buffon also maintained a Cartesian allegiance, insisting that human beings, as instances of “homo duplex,” were formed through two types of sensation, a purely material or corporeal one, which they shared with beasts, and a spiritual one, which was unique to them as a possessors of a soul (âme).[^30]

Angrily, Condillac set out to refute Buffon’s dual sensation theory. His crowning refutation concerned the implications of that theory for the unity of the self:

> [I]f one were to admit these two kinds of sensation, it seems to me that those of the body would never modify the soul and those of the soul would never modify the body. There would thus be in each man two selves (moi), two persons which, having nothing in common in their manner of feeling (sentir), could have no commerce with one another. Each would exist in absolute ignorance of what transpired in the other.

There is thus no doubt in Condillac’s mind that the premises of sensationalist psychology, when not perverted by Buffon’s odd brand of dualism, can undergird a unified self. “The unity of the person necessarily supposes the unity of the sensing entity,” he says, implicitly denying that such unity might require the importation of some suprasensory principle.[^31] His is an argument rich in irony for the philosophically sophisticated reader, for it turns on its head the argument that seventeenth-century Cartesians like Hayer mounted against Locke: remember the specter of the hypothetical multiply selved individual that Hayer raised as part of his denunciation of Locke’s sensationalism. In Condillac’s somewhat carnavalesque rendition of philosophical polemic, monism unproblematically produces a unified self, while Buffon’s Cartesian-inflected dualism endows the individual with a grotesque double personality. Most important for our purposes, these passages are an aberration in Condillac’s oeuvre. He seems to have gotten involved in the debate about the unity of the sensationalist self unintentionally, only because he felt compelled to rebut Buffon, not because he believed that the debate had much intrinsic worth.

### New Terminology: From Ame to Moi

The increasing interest in the self evinced by Locke’s famous chapter and by the eighteenth-century philosophers who parsed it was accompanied by a shift in French vocabulary. The traditional term âme, usually translated by the English “soul,” but in fact combining the meanings of soul, mind, spirit, mental life, and consciousness, gradually gave way to the term moi, which was in turn eventually replaced by the nominal form, le moi.[^32]

The Encyclopédie of Diderot and d’Alembert reflects the status quo ante. The long article “Ame” defines that time-honored term as “a principle endowed with consciousness and feeling” and goes on to ponder, with reference to Western philosophy from the ancient Egyptians and Greeks forward, whether soul is a pure quality or a substance, how it is related to the divinity, and in what sorts of beings it resides. Unlike the species-specific “self,” always reserved for humans, âme was potentially more capacious in its reference: hence the old quarrel that could still rage during the Enlightenment over the existence of an animal soul, or âme des bêtes. By contrast to the article “Ame,” the article “Moi” in the Encyclopédie concerns nothing so elevated as consciousness. Only a few paragraphs in length, it makes short work of a suspect term whose sole meaning is grammatical:

> MOI It has been contended that this personal pronoun has the same meaning as the je or as the Latin ego. The je has been condemned by the word egotism, but that does not prevent it from being suitable on certain occasions. It follows still less that the moi cannot sometimes be sublime or admirably placed. Here are some examples. . . .[^33]

In fact, this article was already out of date when it was first published in 1765. For as the eighteenth-century French texts just cited make plain, the term moi had, by mid-century, expanded its meaning beyond the workaday first-person pronoun; in philosophical discourse of both the Cartesian and sensationalist varieties, it was being used as a noun to denote the human being’s individuated mental stuff. It was not, however, being so used in any consistent fashion. On the one hand, Condillac’s 1746 Essai implicitly defined the moi as that aspect of the âme that has cognizance of its persisting sameness and is the locus of personal identity.[^34] On the other hand, both Hayer and Lignac, as quoted earlier, used moi and âme as synonyms and seemed simply to equate the spiritual substance with the sense of personal identity. In addition, at least one eighteenth-century figure scrupulously avoided using the term moi altogether to refer to enduring personal identity: Locke’s first French translator, the Huguenot emigré to England, Pierre Coste. In a fascinating footnote to his translation of the chapter “Of Identity and Diversity” of Locke’s Essay, Coste explained why he had selected the terms le soi and soi-même to translate Locke’s “self.” One reason for his choice was the indelible coloration that Pascal had, in Coste’s view at least, imparted to the term le moi; the other reason was Locke’s own neologizing in English:

> The moi of Monsieur Pascal in some manner authorizes me to make use of the words soy, soy-même, to express the sentiment that each one has within himself that he is the same. Or, better put, I was obliged to do so by an indispensable necessity, for I would not know how otherwise to express the meaning of my author, who has taken a parallel liberty in his language. The roundabout terms I would have to employ on this occasion would clutter the prose and perhaps render it completely unintelligible.[^35]

In some famous passages in his Pensées, Pascal used the noun moi to refer to the fallen self that had not yet found God. “The moi is hateful (haïssable),” he declared bluntly. Its hatefulness derived from its exclusive self-love (“it makes itself the center of everything”) and from its desire to rule tyrannically over others. One version of the Pensées had Pascal pronouncing the rhetorical rule, similar to the one later disputed in the Encyclopédie article “Moi,” that an “honnête homme ought to avoid . . . using the words ‘je’ and ‘moi.’” In Pascal’s theological scheme, conversion to the love of God would bring about not merely a forgetfulness of the moi but a total annihilation of it.[^36] The noun moi was so thoroughly imbued with these Pascalian associations for Coste that he regarded it as inappropriate to signify the respectable entity, the bearer of moral responsibility, that was the Lockean self.

But while Coste is basically correct that Locke’s “self” was a philosophical neologism in English,[^37] the French moi as a philosophical equivalent, or near-equivalent, of âme antedated Locke and appears to have been the contribution of no less a thinker than Descartes.[^38] In the paragraph of the Discours de la méthode (1637) immediately following the celebrated announcement, “I think, therefore I am,” Descartes set forth his terminology: “This Moy, that is to say the Ame by which I am what I am, is entirely distinct from and easier to know than the body.”[^39] The successive paragraphs of this text are larded with uses of moi lacking an article: “thoughts that I had of several other things outside of moy, like the sky, earth, light, heat . . .”; questions about whether these things were “superior to moy” or perhaps “in moy.”[^40]

Moi as a philosophical term was thus both relatively novel in the eighteenth century and shot through with a fundamental ambiguity: it referred both to the Cartesian self, that unextended and hence indivisible res cogitans given all at once to consciousness as a self-evident truth, and to the more flimsy and tentative Lockean self, that temporal accumulation of sensory impressions whose unity might be open to question. The increasingly widespread use of the term thus indicated a growing interest in the totality formed by individuated mental stuff without expressing a preference between its robust Cartesian variety and its precarious sensationalist one.

### The Deaccentuated Self of Later Sensationalism

Although French sensationalists participated in the linguistic shift that replaced the premodern âme with the modern moi, and although, when backed into a corner, Condillac explicitly asserted the fundamental unity of a self assembled from discrete sensations, sensationalist psychology can hardly be said to have emphasized the concept of the self. In the final analysis, that concept seems to have occupied a decidedly peripheral place in Condillac’s own vision of things. His posthumously published Dictionnaire des synonymes contained no entry at all for the term moi.[^41] The theorists and pedagogues he inspired likewise relegated the self to the bottom of their conceptual toolboxes.

The national archives of the central schools suggest that very few of the cadre of general grammar professors bothered to include an exposition of the moi in their courses. Citizen Baradère, who sent the minister of education a particularly copious set of lesson plans from his benighted provincial outpost in the Basses-Pyrénées, may have been the exception that proves the rule. His account of how he taught his students “what constitutes the Personality, or the Moi” shows just how feasible, indeed how easy, such instruction was for a professor familiar with Condillac—and, as Chapter 2 showed, there were many such in this particular school system. Making implicit reference to the hypothetical statue in Condillac’s Traité des sensations and dipping into the Essai sur l’origine des connaissances humaines as well, Baradère instructed his young charges that “the personality or the moi is thus the linkage between the sentiment of one’s being on the one hand and the set of present and remembered sensations on the other. Without that linkage, no one could persuade me that today’s moi was the same as yesterday’s.”[^42] The raw material for this demonstration was all readily accessible in Condillac’s texts. Yet few professors availed themselves of it, indicating a widely shared judgment that the demonstration was fundamental neither to Condillac’s system nor to the worldview they wished to impart to their students.

As sensationalist psychology developed in France after the outbreak of the Revolution, assuming the newly coined name of idéologie, or the science of ideas, and gaining an institutional foothold in the Institut de France, founded in 1795, the deaccentuation of the moi persisted. In his master textbook of general grammar intended for use in the central schools, the Elémens d’idéologie (1st ed. 1801), Antoine-Louis-Claude Destutt de Tracy remained true to Condillac’s strategy of treating the moi in passing rather than as a topic in its own right. If anything, he marginalized the moi even more than his teacher had, scattering his comments throughout the text, never presenting an unequivocal definition.

Dropping Condillac’s device of tracing the successive operations of the âme that unfolded from an originary capacity for sensation, Tracy posited a so-called faculty of thought divided into the four elementary faculties of: (1) sensitivity; (2) memory; (3) judgment; and (4) will. It was an odd and rather misleading taxonomy because, while Tracy had apparently placed all four components on a par, the last three in fact derived logically from the first, as he was at pains to point out. Thus, memory was the “kind of sensitivity” that enabled one “to be affected by the recollection of an impression experienced [earlier]”; judgment the “kind of sensitivity” that was alert to the “relations between our perceptions”; and will the “kind of sensitivity” that afforded us a capacity “to feel desires.”[^43] In other words, all four faculties were “only a result of our [physiological] organization.”[^44]

Within this structure, Tracy first treated the moi not under the rubric of memory, as Condillac had done, but rather under the rubric of will. Observing that “the use of our mechanical and intellectual forces depends in large measure on [our desires], with the result that it is by means of our desires that we are a power in the world,” Tracy then went on to link the will and the self. “That is why we tend to confuse our moi more with this faculty than with any other and that we say, as if they were equivalent, ‘that depends on me’ or ‘that depends on my will.’”[^45] Tracy’s formulation here is decidedly ambiguous: the reader cannot tell whether he is talking about popular prejudices embedded in vulgar language or about his own scientific rendition of psychology. And that ambiguity persists, even when the reader assiduously gathers up the scattered passages in which Tracy discusses the moi. Sometimes the Idéologue asserts categorically, “I am my will” (“ma volonté c’est moi”), a phrase reminiscent of Louis XIV’s famous identification of his royal person with the state. Sometimes he speaks more embracively of “our sensing and willing moi” or muddies the water still further with the dictum that “a pure and simple sensation teaches us the fact of our own existence.”[^46] The reader intent on pinning down Tracy’s position on this matter is forced to become an exegete and, scouring the text for clues, comes to the following conclusion: that Tracy’s is a highly nuanced position in which the capacity for sensation suffices to produce the moi, or the recognition of one’s personal existence, but a manifestation of will, in the form of our own voluntary movement and the resistance that it encounters, is required for the recognition of other existences.[^47] But if the position on the moi in Tracy’s textbook is relatively coherent, the very difficulty of discerning it indicates that his interest in inculcating it in his students was virtually nil.

The Rapports du physique et du morale de l’homme (1802) of the physician P.-J.-G. Cabanis reveals once again that Idéologue discourse incorporated the concept of the moi while theorizing it rather haphazardly. Cabanis takes up the concept for the first (and only) time in this treatise in Mémoire 10, which covers a veritable grab bag of topics: its title lists “animal life, the first determinations of sensitivity, instinct, sympathy, sleep, and madness.” His main point about the moi was so avant-garde that it would have little resonance or impact in France for nearly a hundred years. Cabanis wanted to do nothing less than decouple sensitivity and consciousness, to argue that sensitivity was alive in parts of the body “where the moi catches absolutely no sight of its presence” nor “receives any notification of its action.”[^48] In other words, Cabanis put forth a position that adumbrated the kind of vertical fragmentation of the individuated mental stuff that I discussed in the Introduction. His position thus shared certain structural features with the one Freud would much later advance. Far from accentuating the conscious self, he demoted it and diminished its sphere of efficacy.

Such a free and heterodox spirit was Cabanis that his emphasis on what he called “internal sensation” even had the effect of undermining the key sensationalist credo about the blank slate. While accepting that the newborn infant was a “tabula rasa with respect to the external universe,” he insisted that at the moment of birth the infant’s “cerebral center [had] already received and combined many [internal] impressions.” Thus, while endorsing provisionally the sensationalist wisdom that the moi was the product of post-uterine experience, he added the important caveat that no one had yet undertaken “a detailed and complete analysis of the ideological condition of the infant” during the brief period before external objects began to make their impression on the sense organs. His ultimate inconclusiveness on the issue of the moment of origin of the moi underscored the relative indifference of the sensationalist tradition to the issue of selfhood.[^49] So did Cabanis’ obvious pleasure in entertaining the audacious hypothesis that, since the body’s different organ systems were served by separate neural webs, there might even be “a kind of partial moi,” one that existed in the plural in each individual. His taste for philosophical play had its limits, however, and in the end he supported the conventional view by stipulating that “the moi, as we conceive it, resides in the shared center” of our nervous system and was, hence, presumably unitary.[^50]

With respect to its treatment of the moi, the work of Pierre Laromiguière, the main academic continuator of the sensationalist tradition during the Napoleonic Empire and the Restoration, diverged noticeably from the pattern set by Tracy and Cabanis. For one thing, it showed signs of linguistic archaism. Laromiguière was capable of using the term moi not only in a modern neutral register to mean the human subject but also in the antiquated, Pascalian, pejorative sense of vile selfishness and egotism.[^51] In addition, much more attached to the literal texts of Condillac than were the other Idéologues, Laromiguière revived the term âme, going so far as to give his collected Sorbonne lectures the subtitle, “Essays on the Faculties of the Soul.” His students called attention to this surprising word choice. Why, they asked, did “this word âme recur in each sentence of [his] lectures”? He had not, after all, “demonstrated that we have a soul.” Laromiguière replied that he would, in due course, provide a proof of the existence of the soul, inserting it in its proper place once he had prepared the ground. Until then, and even afterward, they could regard the phrase “intellectual faculties” as synonymous with “faculties of the soul.”[^52]

Hence Laromiguière deemphasized the moi by diluting his use of that term with his use of the term âme and by implicitly assigning to each term the meanings that they had held for Condillac over a half-century earlier: the âme was the general spiritual stuff, and the moi the differentiated part of that stuff possessing self-awareness.[^53] Linguistically archaic, Laromiguière also displayed a concern for the ontological status of the âme that was at once a throwback to the pre-Enlightenment era and a timely mark of early nineteenth-century preoccupations. He was bent on rescuing Condillac from the charge of materialism. It was true, he conceded, that the master had derived all the mental faculties from sensation. Still, Condillac did not regard sensation as a property of matter but rather as a “spiritual modification of a spiritual substance.”[^54] To be sure, Laromiguière could have extended this spiritualist argument to argue forcefully for mental unity. But he did not do so—and, besides, his spiritualist argument concerned the âme and not its modern, highly personalized subset, the moi.

Although the renditions of latter-day sensationalism offered by Tracy, Cabanis, and Laromiguière each have their own particular accents, all three theorists concurred in placing the moi at the periphery of their psychological systems. If none seemed to doubt that there was a self in this mental apparatus, none seemed exercised about demonstrating, elaborating upon, or hammering in that point.

### Contrapuntal Rumblings

It would be wrong to give the impression that Condillac’s enlightened audience universally shared his ease with a minimalist self. In the 1750s and 1770s at least two fundamentally sympathetic readers privately protested this aspect of his system. Thus Jean-Jacques Rousseau, annotating his copy of Helvétius’s De l’Esprit (1758) not too long after its publication, objected to a principle articulated in that book that, he believed, Helvétius shared with Condillac: the essential passivity imputed to all the faculties of the human mind, including the capacity to make judgments through the comparison of ideas, once it was granted that mind originates solely in the reception of sensations. “[E]specially in the first part of the profession of the Savoyard vicar,” Rousseau wrote testily in the margins of his Helvétius, “I have tried to combat [that principle] and to establish the activity of our judgments. . . .”[^55] But public loyalty to sensationalist psychology seems to have been so integral a part of Rousseau’s enlightened identity at this date, perhaps because its reverse connoted Catholicism and clericalism, that he took pains to keep his strictures secret during his lifetime.[^56]

The abbé Emmanuel-Joseph Sieyès, who burst on the scene in 1789 as the author of the superlatively influential political pamphlet, What Is the Third Estate?, is not a figure routinely inserted into the history of psychology. Yet, on his own initiative, Sieyès studied Condillac intensively while a young seminarian at Saint-Sulpice during the 1760s and 1770s. Reluctantly obeying a paternal injunction to enter the priesthood, he described himself (in an autobiographical pamphlet written anonymously in the third person in 1794) as having “contracted a sort of savage melancholy” as soon as he found himself “sequestered” within the seminary’s walls. In that despondent condition, an “involuntary penchant inclined him to meditation,” with the result that “no books procured him a more lively satisfaction than those of Locke, Condillac, and Bonnet.”[^57] Sieyès left behind dense and copious reading notes on Condillac bound together in a “Large Metaphysical Notebook” (Grand Cahier Métaphysique), as well as individual note cards devoted to different operations of the understanding, such as “memory,” “reminiscence,” and “imagination.”[^58] He even left behind a drawing of the psychological apparatus. (See Figure 3.)

[To view this image, refer to the print version of this title.]

Figure 3: Diagram of the Psyche by the Young Sieyès. The archivist has dated this drawing, found among Sieyès’ early papers and labeled in Latin, as 1773 or 1774. Although the psychological model depicted is very different from the sensationalism that the young seminarian embraced around the same time, the drawing provides visual evidence of Sieyès’ long-standing fascination with the task of conceptualizing the mental apparatus. (Centre historique des Archives Nationales [CHAN], Paris, Sieyès papers 284 AP 2/1/155. Photo courtesy of the Atelier photographique of the CHAN.)

The young Sieyès became a thoroughgoing enthusiast of the French sensationalist, lauding his methodology against the deductive reasoning of the Physiocrats (“It will be absolutely necessary to follow Condillac if we wish accurate knowledge of what we know and how we know it”).[^59] He endorsed the posture of empathetic self-reflexivity that Condillac associated with the spectateur philosophe: that of putting oneself in the place of the statue whose sense-by-sense unfolding was hypothetically recounted in the Traité des sensations.[^60] At times, he evinced total comfort with the minimalist Condillacian self. Thus we find him cheerfully, even a bit triumphantly, offering his own metaphorical rendition of the self (here called, simply, “man”) as an empty, unstructured room awaiting the random arrival of sensory impingements and combinations and, as such, delightfully transparent:

> Man is, as they say, a mystery to man, [but] that is really his own fault. I regard man as a large ballroom. It has five doors [i.e., the five senses] by which a prodigious number of people enter, commence motion, part company, and finally arrange themselves in a thousand ways. He who would wish, without entering this room, to number each one, to know it and its relations with the others, would never reach the end of his quest. But since it is certain that this place contains only people who entered by one of the five doors, nothing is easier than getting to know them. Let us place at each door observers who have the right of interrogation, and we will not only know the exact number of people who entered but will know the people sufficiently well not to lose track of them in the different relations to which chance gives rise among them.[^61]

But even in this early phase of infatuation with sensationalist psychology, Sieyès gave voice to a certain area of disagreement: like Rousseau, he was concerned, at least sporadically, to rescue human mental processes from the passivity to which the sensationalist paradigm seemed to consign them. For example, reading Charles Bonnet’s 1760 Essai analytique sur les facultés de l’âme, which made use of Condillac’s statue model, he asked impatiently, “But when does the directing moi arise?” He then went on to supply the explanation that the author had, in his view, so annoyingly omitted:

> In any whole subjected to the action of beings around it and capable of reaction, it is impossible that a center not be formed from all the actions that it experiences. It is there that I establish the source of reaction. Out of this single point I constitute the soul of all. Beforehand there had been as many souls as parts; now there is a moi to which all responds, all is subordinated.[^62]

Similarly, he dismissed with the terse phrase “very limited” Condillac’s definition of will as “an absolute desire that occurs when we think that the desired thing is within our power.” Such ex post facto tailoring of desire to capacity apparently struck him as a passive, defeatist attitude. “By will I mean action,” he rejoined.[^63]

Around 1798, when he was a thoroughly public man, deeply immersed in the politics and philosophical debates of the Directory, Sieyès read Condillac again; he even jotted down fresh thoughts in the “metaphysical notebook” of his seminary days.[^64] It is unclear whether his view of Condillac had measurably evolved during the long, eventful period that intervened.[^65] On the one hand, he still evidently regarded Condillac’s texts as foundational and, on the other, he continued to express dissatisfaction with the unorganized, decentered moi Condillac had postulated. For example, now using the physiological language into which Idéologues like Cabanis translated Condillac’s sensationalism in the 1790s, he again postulated the need for a “general center” in the brain, or alternatively, a “common node” of nervous fibers, which would bring together the “knowledge of all sorts acquired by interior and exterior observation,” thus combating the aimless dispersion of mental contents that the sensationalist model of mind seemed to encourage and achieving the critical “separation of the moi from exterior objects [and] from my sensations.”[^66]

The political vicissitudes of the years following 1789 may well have provoked Sieyès’ return to Condillac and his reexamination of the sensationalist doctrine of the moi. An engaged politician from the beginning of the monarchy’s constitutional crisis in 1788 until he resigned the presidency of the Senate under the First Empire, he had obviously endured considerable personal upheaval as France careened from one political regime to the next. Optimistic and militant about the emancipatory possibilities of overthrowing absolutism in 1789, he initially had the gratifying experience of seeing French history unfold in accordance with the blueprint he offered in his pamphlet, What Is the Third Estate? But that political accomplishment had later been eradicated by the Terror, which Sieyès, then a deputy to the Convention, managed to weather by lying low. By 1798, the year when he resumed his reading of Condillac, the deliberately moderate republican regime called the Directory, in which he had once placed his hopes, was disintegrating; he would soon hasten its demise by helping to engineer the coup d’etat that brought Napoleon to power. Whether Sieyès saw any relationship between the political instability that had plagued France since the Revolution and the passivity and fragmentation of the moi postulated by the Revolution’s quasi-official psychologist, Condillac, we can, for lack of direct evidence, only conjecture—although his use of the language of activity-passivity in both psychological and political contexts at the very beginning of the Revolution certainly suggests a propensity on his part to make that linkage.[^67] Another event, intellectual in nature, seems, however, demonstrably connected to Sieyès’ resumption of his psychological studies and of his critique of Condillac.

That event was the importation of German philosophy into France after Thermidor. Hoping to lower the political temperature of an overheated country, the Directory revived, in the form of the Institut, the officially sponsored academic culture to which France had long been accustomed and attempted to assert its predominance over the freewheeling literary culture that, since 1789, had been produced through the mechanism of the commercial marketplace. Introducing Kantian philosophy, with its appropriate tone of sober rationality, was part of this project. The government thus subsidized the publication of a French translation of Kant’s Perpetual Peace in 1796.[^68] This work of political philosophy was especially dear to Sieyès’ heart, and its pacific universal republicanism seemed to the leaders of the Directory to furnish just the philosophical ideal that could end the seemingly interminable radicalization of the Revolution.[^69]

More relevant to our concerns here, Kant’s epistemology and that of his rebellious student Fichte also made their way to France during the same period. One of their earliest envoys was the young Prussian savant Wilhelm von Humboldt, who arrived in Paris in the fall of 1797 and quickly infiltrated the philosophical circles of the capital. In May 1798 Destutt de Tracy invited him to a day-long “metaphysical symposium” with Cabanis, Laromiguière, and Sieyès, among others, in attendance. The prospects for real dialogue were not bright, for Tracy had already expressed his suspicion of the new German transcendentalism by telling Humboldt frankly (and in typically sensationalist language), “I fear that your imagination works overtime and embroiders nature.”[^70] Nonetheless Humboldt’s vivid accounts of the symposium in his private journal and in a long letter to Friedrich Schiller inadvertently reveal a good deal about the conceptualization of the moi among leading French intellectuals at the very end of the eighteenth century.

Humboldt put the moi and its assumed activity at the center of the discussion, informing his French colleagues that “our [German] metaphysics is nothing but a perfect development of the actions of what we call our moi.” Or, as he rephrased the point toward the end of the same journal entry: “all philosophy rests on the pure intuition of the moi, outside all experience; either explicitly—that is, if one departs directly from that intuition, as Fichte does—or implicitly,” if one traces the apprehension of phenomena to the categories in the manner of Kant. That basic proposition met with fierce resistance from most of his French interlocutors, resulting in a debate that Humboldt wryly characterized as “sterile but simple to conduct because everyone [on the other side] expressed easily refutable ideas.” Laromiguière, whom he sized up as the most clear-thinking and confident of the French group but also the “most negative and dry,” was obdurate in his wholesale rejection of the German approach: he “affirmed a total passivity (Humboldt’s emphasis) of the mind in the production of representations.” Not surprisingly, the one Frenchman present who showed any receptivity to the German mode of philosophizing was Sieyès; he stood out as the single exception to all of Humboldt’s generalizations about the mindset of his colleagues across the Rhine.[^71]

Of those colleagues Humboldt said damningly: “They have no idea, not even the slightest inkling, of anything other than appearance; pure volition, the true good, the moi, pure self-consciousness—all this is totally incomprehensible to them. Even when they use the same terms, they always impute a completely different meaning to them.”[^72] Only Sieyès departed from the accepted sensationalist wisdom, once even voicing the heterodox opinion that “the philosopher brushes aside sensory judgments; he closes his eyes.”[^73] Humboldt sometimes seemed filled with admiration for him: “He manifestly has a more profound mind than all the others,” he reported to Schiller. “He says things that sound simply like they came from Kant or Fichte.”[^74] But while Sieyès may, at some point, have had a direct encounter with the German philosophers and their works—he briefly served the Directory as ambassador to Berlin—his affinity with their style of thought seems to have been thoroughly self-generated and homegrown, the fruit of his own native tendency.[^75] A cluster of German Jacobins who made contact with him after 1795 regarded him as a Kantian who didn’t know he was a Kantian.[^76] And Humboldt found his insights so half-baked, unsystematic, and obviously untutored that he was almost driven to distraction by his efforts to communicate with Sieyès on a philosophical plane:

> [I]t is not pleasant to get into a debate with him. He obviously has new ideas, but he is not yet certain of them, he is too preoccupied with them to listen carefully to someone else, and his inadequate mastery of them prevents him from explaining them. That’s why he so often argues, so to speak, in desperation . . .[^77]

Writing to Schiller, Humboldt further detailed his frustration with Sieyès. The man who so splendidly “avow[ed] the inadequacy of all French philosophy” presented his own philosophical ideas in a totally disorderly fashion and was “too proud and impatient” to accept advice about reformulating them. “If he could decide to develop a [philosophical] system in the German manner . . . he would surely produce something great.” But he was “too French for that,” Humboldt opined, meaning that he was so caught up in “public life” and attuned to the response of the public that he would desist if his ideas failed to gained widespread acceptance. In another way, too, Sieyès seemed to Humboldt to lack the resolve and the perseverance necessary to produce a rigorous German-style philosophy. His thought had an irritable, mordant quality; it “penetrates deeply, but with lightning bolts that suddenly plunge into the interior of the thing, not with a slow penetration accompanied by steady effort.” While Humboldt knew that Sieyès had been, as he put it with unwitting understatement, “very important during the Revolution,” he suspected him of harboring a fundamental character flaw. Sieyès, he opined, had the misfortune to be at once a philosopher manqué and a politician manqué:

> He is one of those rare men of whom it can be said almost truthfully that for all their strength of intellect and of character, they were made neither for thinking nor for acting. That is because their entire makeup is passionate—not that this or that particular passion really dominates, but because everything that surges within them bears the mark of passion.[^78]

Moreover, for all the un-French philosophical tendencies Sieyès sometimes expressed, at other times he appeared resolutely stick-in-the-mud. Visiting him at home shortly after the metaphysical symposium, Humboldt encountered a Sieyès (dressed in a night cap and complaining of a headache) disappointingly conventional in his views. Said Humboldt: “Among all metaphysicians, today it is Condillac and Bonnet—surely the most superficial—on whom he lavishes his highest praise.” Faced with such retrograde opinions, Humboldt feared that Sieyès’ genuinely metaphysical spirit had been “corrupted by the [French] national character or, at least, by national habits.”[^79]

In Sieyès, then, we see a man with his hand on the pulse of French Revolutionary politics struggling to break loose from the sensationalist paradigm. But, deeply loyal to Condillac and to the Frenchness he represented in an international context, Sieyès always struggled ambivalently. As defective as he found the Condillacian moi, he lacked the patience and determination to devote more than intermittent effort to the task of repairing it.

### A Columbus of the Self

His contemporary, Marie-François-Pierre Gonthier de Biran, called Maine de Biran, took on that task and brought it to something akin to completion during the opening two decades of the nineteenth century. Starting out as an Idéologue—Destutt de Tracy and Cabanis selected his Influence de l’habitude sur la faculté de penser for a prize awarded by the Institut in 1802—he gradually chipped away at that psychological model until he achieved an alternative that could properly be called “Biranian.”[^80] Its main features were the postulation of a self, or moi, existing before sensory experience and as the precondition for it; a phenomenological elaboration of the nature of experience and the radical separation of the domain of external or sensory experience, labeled “objective,” from a privileged domain of internal experience, or consciousness, labeled “subjective”; and the postulation of consciousness of the moi as a so-called fait primitif, or originary fact, that grounded the theory at a fixed and stable point. In addition, Maine de Biran’s moi was active, appearing in the space between the psychological and the physiological in the form of the voluntary movement of otherwise inert muscles. Such willed movement conveyed the sense of one’s own causality; being a cause in the world was tantamount to and an essential attribute of selfhood. Biranism did not constitute a full-fledged, self-enclosed system. Its author never completed the synoptic work he had long intended to produce, leading one commentator aptly to compare Biranism to a “Chinese painted scroll whose significance emerges as it is unwound.”[^81] But even if unsystematic, Biranism offered a thoroughly transformed version of the fragmented and passive sensationalist self.

The son of a physician in the Périgord whose ancestors had inhabited that southwestern province for centuries, Maine de Biran was in some ways the diametric opposite of Sieyès and in some ways his analogue. The two men’s responses to 1789 could not have diverged more sharply: while Sieyès was busy radicalizing the constitutional crisis that had prompted Louis XVI to call the Estates General, Maine de Biran was serving in the gardes du corps, devoted to preserving His Majesty’s physical safety. Wounded near Versailles in the chaotic October Days of 1789, his military unit soon disbanded by the king, he decided to retool as an engineer and began to study mathematics in Paris. But once the Terror began, he prudently withdrew to his family estate in Grateloup where, Montaigne-like, he turned his attention to philosophizing and almost constant self-observation.[^82] A royalist all his life, he became reconciled to the more moderate face of the Revolution that surfaced after the fall of Robespierre; at that juncture, he added a public political role to his private philosophical one, thus replicating Sieyès’ pattern of operating simultaneously on those two separate tracks. Possessing the local notable’s sense of civic duty, he occupied a long succession of offices, including administrator of the department of the Dordogne in the Year III, deputy from that department to the Council of Five Hundred under the Directory, member of the Legislative Body under the Empire, and member of the Chamber of Deputies under the Restoration monarchy.[^83] Like Sieyès, if at a more modest level of participation, he had a day-to-day experience of the political vicissitudes of the Revolution and its aftermath and, as a result, a highly developed political consciousness.

Where Maine de Biran differed most dramatically from Sieyès was in his well-documented habit of minute self-observation. Much like Sieyès, he looked inward in his scientific quest after the general laws of the human mind: already in 1794 he called for a “psychology” modeled on “experimental physics,” one that would oblige researchers “to do experiments on themselves similar to (though different in kind from) the one Spalanzani had courageously repeated at his own risk of swallowing various substances in order to confirm how digestion works.”[^84] But unlike Sieyès, he also, and perhaps mainly, looked inward to explore the particularity of his own interior landscape. Physically sickly since childhood and exquisitely sensitive by nature, he lived with a chronic malaise that solicited his concerted investigation and analysis. “It is only unhealthy people who [actually] feel themselves existing,” he observed while in his twenties, at a time when he explicitly traced to his proclivity for self-examination to his pathologically “weak constitution.”[^85] By contrast to the cahier métaphysique that Sieyès filled with matter-of-fact reading notes and abstract philosophical speculations, Maine de Biran kept, in 1794–95 and again, intermittently, from 1814 until shortly before his death in 1824, a journal intime in which his own interior life was the central datum. Obviously many stories can be told on the basis of so rich a text, which put Maine de Biran self-consciously in the tradition of Montaigne and Rousseau.[^86] The story I will tell here aligns Maine de Biran’s need to narrate his interiority with two other factors: the political consciousness that he acquired in the course of traversing the Revolution, and his philosophical project to renovate the sensationalist self.[^87] It was, I will suggest, his deep and anguished personal investment in that latter project that fueled his engagement with it, lending him the perseverance that Sieyès lacked.

Maine de Biran’s triple cluster of preoccupations, and the odd juxtapositions to which they give rise, can be found repeatedly in the pages of his journal. Take, for example, the autumn of 1814, the period when the larger portion of the journal begins. Our protagonist is in Paris, a member of the Chamber of Deputies of the newly restored Bourbon monarchy. In the opening sentences of most entries, he reports the weather and assesses its impact on his mood. A cool, rainy week in early October is credited with turning him “melancholic” and thus “much less disposed to unfurl myself outside” than to “come back to myself; thus I incline toward psychological meditations as if by an instinct that is periodically renewed with marked force.” (Throughout the journal, méditations psychologiques is his preferred term for his intervals of self-searching, and he is also fond of the verb-and-adverb form, méditer psychologiquement.) He devotes his mornings to such meditations but for the rest of the day is “swept up in the active life” despite himself. He attends legislative debates about granting French citizenship to the inhabitants of Napoleon’s fallen empire (he began to express his opinion on the floor but was interrupted by a more talkative deputy) and debates about the restitution of the property of the returned emigrés (this time he utterly failed to speak, doubting his ability to intervene extemporaneously in such a weighty matter, and then berated himself for his shameful silence); he regularly dines at the home of the minister of the interior.[^88] He is a man enmeshed in politics, who recognizes the seriousness of his historical moment and feels dutybound to help puzzle out France’s post-Revolutionary future, even while he strongly suspects that he is not up to the job. So he goes back and forth, somewhat jarringly, between the nuts and bolts of national legislation and a never-ending fascination with his delicate and hypersensitive psyche. The sheer, repeated contiguity of politics and psychological meditation suggests that some deeper thread of significance joins the two activities for him.

The third recurrent motif is plaited together with these other two: a small, newly founded philosophical society meets at his home on alternate weeks. Its members include the naturalist Georges Cuvier, Maine de Biran’s close friend the physicist A.-M. Ampère, the Idéologue Joseph-Marie Degérando, philosophy professors of a newer stripe like Pierre-Paul Royer-Collard and his young colleague Victor Cousin, and the future politician François Guizot. Maine de Biran is not always completely efficacious in this setting either: at least once he failed to complete a paper he had promised to present, leaving the disappointed group to its own devices.[^89] But in general he feels far more competent among his fellow philosophers than in the Chamber of Deputies. As he describes a dinner in the bosom of such companions in May 1816: “I felt like chatting; I speak the language of metaphysics with more facility than that of politics or business; several strings vibrate when I have the occasion to talk about a science that is familiar to me.”[^90] The common interest responsible for bringing together the members of the informal philosophical society has great significance in this vignette of Maine de Biran’s daily life. Though it is never expressed in general terms, the cumulative effect of the topics addressed at the individual sessions is unmistakable: “psychological language”; “the sentiment of the moi and activity”; “the moi and the originary fact (fait primitif) of consciousness.”[^91] The assembled company is, in other words, participating in the overhaul of sensationalist psychology. They are marking their distance from their eighteenth-century forebears by engaging in serious self-talk.

Maine de Biran’s personal need to supplant the sensationalist self with something more robust can be seen in the 1794–95 installment of his journal, begun at his estate at Grateloup while he hid from the Terror. He appears here, not surprisingly, as an adept of sensationalist psychology, accustomed to depicting himself to himself in its terms. That very depiction, which includes evocations of passivity, mobility, and precarious malleability, functions simultaneously as a complaint. In his opening paragraph, Maine de Biran writes:

> [T]his unhappy existence is only a series of heterogeneous moments lacking all stability. They go floating, fleeing rapidly, without our ever having the power to fix them in place. Everything influences us, and we change ceaselessly in accordance with our surroundings. I often amuse myself by watching the flow of the different states of my mind. They are like the billows of a river, sometimes calm, sometimes agitated, but always succeeding one another without permanence.[^92]

The same basic complaint reappears pages later. The sensationalist psyche lacks a master (“I am going to prove how little influence [empire] we exercise over our own ideas, how these light phantoms appear and disappear . . . sometimes in an orderly manner, sometimes in an intolerable hodgepodge, while the mind, a pure spectator, is incapable of rectifying the disorder . . .”). The psyche follows the mechanistic pattern of cause and effect that Stendhal, similarly reliant on sensationalist psychology, would later highlight in his portrayal of Julien Sorel (“[A] fiber accidentally rattled will produce a rattling in those with which it is linked, setting off a sequence of perceptions that I can neither arrest nor foresee”).[^93] Just as the organizers of the Revolutionary festivals described those patriotic displays, positively, as imprinting the soft wax of spectators’ minds (see Chapter 2), so Maine de Biran twice uses the word mollesse—softness—to negatively describe his own character, formed as it is by chance environmental factors outside its control.[^94] “I am merely passive,” he laments, “I say what I would not wish to say, I do what I would not wish to do.”[^95] Even more than twenty years later, when Maine de Biran had long since transformed his understanding of human psychology, he retained an acute, almost painful awareness of the shaping force that his physical environment exercised over him. Here he is in Paris in November 1816, having just attended a meeting of the Conseil d’Etat:

> I returned to my new lodgings and began to settle in. There is in the strangeness of the impressions of all the environing objects something that distracts the mind by shaking up the senses and calling forth a sort of sensitive attention. We must mold ourselves to these objects, they must become very familiar in order that they cease making on us that distracting, tiring impression.[^96]

Perennially assailed by melancholy and a humiliating sense of inefficacy, then, the Maine de Biran of 1794 keenly disliked his “softness” and lack of control, his being held hostage to the mental imprinting of his physical environment. His personal discomfort translated into a recognition of the disadvantages of a sensationalist model of mind and, in particular, of what I have called the horizontal fragmentation of self effected by that model. As early as 1794 he resolved—if so tentative a statement can be called a resolution—one day to repair the model: “I would like, if ever I could undertake something sustained, to investigate the degree to which the mind is active, the degree to which it can modify external impressions, augment or diminish their intensity by the attention it gives them; I would like to examine the extent to which it is master of that attention.”[^97]

His uncomfortable sense of horizontal fragmentation was exacerbated by a related sense of inauthenticity, or segmentation of self. He did not blame this condition entirely, à la Rousseau, on the inherent nature of society; he also faulted his own psychological weakness, his tendency to be imprinted by whatever or whomever was around him. The Terror over, Maine de Biran had emerged from hiding; he could freely leave the solitude of his estate and show his face in the town of Bergerac. It was not a pleasant experience:

> I saw a lot of people and received courtesies and expressions of attachment and concern, but coercion and dissimulation broke through those affectionate transports. So many masks and not a single heart! Nonetheless I was obliged to respond as if these compliments were truthful—that is, to disguise myself, too, and put on a mask like everyone else, for it would be ridiculous to remain in a natural state (à visage nu) when everyone around you was in domino.

Maine de Biran finds this game of deception, of “lying to oneself,” a “torment.” He believes that he would be able to avoid it and, hence, to “live fruitfully in the social world (le monde)” and “derive some advantage from the commerce of men” if he had a “great firmness of character” enabling him to defy “opinion.” Of course, his lot is just the reverse: softness rather than firmness. “[A]ll the fibers of my brain are so mobile that they yield to the impression of objects. . . .”[^98] What Maine de Biran offers us in this passage from his journal of 1794–95, then, is a rendition of Rousseau’s Discourse on the Origins of Inequality inflected by individual psychology. In his view, those people endowed with sufficient personal “firmness,” or imperviousness to their environment, can escape from the amour-propre and corrupt artifice that otherwise infect society.

The first installment of the journal intime thus enables us to see the personal emotional logic behind Maine de Biran’s philosophical project: if he could find, outside the framework of sensationalist psychology, a self that would function as a fixed and invariable yet active center, he might alleviate his own daily suffering. The political logic behind that same project is less clearly spelled out but can be roughly inferred from the portion of the journal covering 1815–16.

It was not, of course, for the sake of democratic participation that Maine de Biran wanted to strengthen the self. The notable from the Périgord had no interest in the political capabilities of the masses. He regarded popular sovereignty as an “anarchical and revolutionary principle, the source of all the evils that have befallen France in the past twenty-five years.”[^99] But he did believe that a nation got the government it deserved, with desert defined in moral terms. When the exiled Bonaparte returned to France in 1815 for what turned out to be another hundred days of rule, a desolate Maine de Biran observed, “The French people deserve only to be conquered. . . . Born amidst the storms of the Revolution, depraved and deeply immoral, the present generation is not susceptible of good government.”[^100] Furnishing France with “good government,” we can assume, would require not only the return of the Bourbons but, to ensure their continued presence on the throne, also some sort of remedial moral education for the “depraved” Revolutionary generation.

Two weeks later, he recognized a link between the moral failings of that generation and the sensationalist philosophy imbibed during the previous century. Picking up a recently reprinted eighteenth-century edition of Pascal’s Pensées, he was struck by the inadequacy of its scholarly apparatus, which was the work of two great Enlightenment philosophes: Voltaire had provided “extremely ridiculous notes, to which Condorcet had added ones still more ridiculous and inane.” As a result of the psychology to which they subscribed, these two eminent thinkers appeared to lack any appreciation of human interiority. “[T]o cultivate, to exercise the internal sense, that means nothing to our sensualist philosophers”; since they held fast to the proposition that “we get ideas only from the outside,” they dismissed self-contemplation as a useless, contemptible pastime.[^101] (To be sure, Maine de Biran greatly admired the founders of sensationalism, Locke and Condillac, for their personal powers of self-reflexivity.[^102] But he believed that adepts of their completed systems could readily bypass the inward-turning moment and focus on the external environment.) For Maine de Biran, by contrast, the domain of subjective, inner experience—or, in other words, the moi—was the key to our moral being. At the time of the first restoration in 1814 when he was appointed to the administrative and financial post of questeur in the Chamber of Deputies, he noted in his journal that, despite his high salary and new level of material comfort, he had “never been less happy.” He attributed this mental state to the balance between his inward- and outward-turning activities: “Since I arrived at the questure, I have been constantly dragged outside and enveloped in all the impressions of the exterior life; it is only in the interior life and in the exercise of the active faculties, only in the depths of the soul, that one recovers one’s moral being. . . .”[^103] Sensationalist psychology, with its marked orientation toward the “outside,” would, then, sap the morality necessary for a sound political community.

Armed with this reconstruction of Maine de Biran’s logic, we can make sense of the repeated alternation between political and philosophical-psychological preoccupations that marks his journal. It is by constituting the self on active, nonsensationalist lines that Maine de Biran seeks to make good government again possible in France. Thus one of his most complete statements of his political credo, culminating in the rousing sentence, “Without monarchical feeling, without respect and love for the legitimate king, there can be neither religion, nor morality nor fatherland in France,” is followed the very next day by the entry, “I began to piece together the psychological materials I gathered during the past two months in notes on Kant, Lignac, etc.”[^104] Turning inward to find an active and unified self and then to theorize that self was thus partly a political strategy for Maine de Biran. It was a way to mend the broken moral compass of the Revolutionary generation and to revive royalism. In his quest for a robust self, moreover, Maine de Biran looked not only to the recently imported German transcendental philosophy but also to an indigenous, old-fashioned French source: the abbé de Lignac’s early eighteenth-century Catholic apologetics, which, as we have seen, sought to refute Locke straightaway by invoking the self-evident testimony of the sens intime.

Interiority was thus a multiple resource, even a kind of panacea, for Maine de Biran. In a memorable passage in his journal, written in a calm moment about a year after Louis XVIII had been re-restored, he contemplated the limits of our ability to penetrate into the “intimate constitution of this moi” and wistfully mused, “Who knows [ . . . ] if there is not an interior New World one day to be discovered by some metaphysical Columbus . . .?”[^105] His conversation seems to have been so full of references to the moi that his old friend, the abbé Morellet, then ninety years old and still adhering to an Enlightenment intellectual style that failed to privilege self-talk, asked him “brusquely: ‘What’s the moi?’” Like anyone asked to define a term that is so basic to his thought that he cannot tease it out from all the things to which it is connected, Maine de Biran was nonplused. “I could not reply,” he recorded in his journal. He went on to suggest that the moi could not be objectified for purposes of definition but could be known only performatively and from inside: “One must place oneself in the intimate viewpoint of consciousness and, thus having present that unity which judges all phenomena while remaining invariable, one perceives this moi and ceases asking what it is.”[^106]

By emphasizing “unity” and invariability,” by criticizing as shallow and amoral the sensationalists’ fixation on the external environment, by changing the assumptions and methods of a psychological science, making its data the internal ones of consciousness,[^107] Maine de Biran had succeeded brilliantly in locating a self in the mental apparatus. However, he entrusted his findings to a bundle of manuscripts that, despite his friends’ prodding, he refused to publish and that, by the time of his death, weighed some sixty pounds.[^108] Only his immediate circle, including the metaphysical society that had regularly met at his home, knew of his endeavor and his accomplishment, and at his funeral Royer-Collard, speaking for that select group, rightly called him “the teacher (maître) of us all.” But Maine de Biran’s renovated model of the self was not entirely lost, even in the short term. To be sure, his manuscripts would not be published until the Second Empire was in full swing. But at the time of his death, one member of his circle was already adapting his doctrine of the self, albeit selectively, for consumption on a vast scale.

### NOTES

The epigraph is from AN: 284 AP 2/1, “Moi” (note on a loose sheet of paper, dated 1773). My thanks to Jacques Guilhaumou for providing me with his transcription of the original text. “Le passage difficile est d’en venir à former le moi.”

[^1]: 1. Dieudonné Thiébault, Grammaire philosophique, ou la métaphysique, la logique et la grammaire, réunies en un seul corps de doctrine, 2 vols. (Paris: Courcier, Year XI-1802), Preface, 1: p. xx for the quotation, pp. xx–xxx for Thiébault’s involvement with Frederick the Great.

[^2]: 2. Charles Taylor, Sources the Self: The Making of the Modern Identity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989), p. x.

[^3]: 3. Louis-Marie Reveillière-Lépeaux, Réflexions sur le culte, sur les cérémonies civiles et sur les fêtes nationales (Paris: Jansen, Year V), pp. 33–34.

[^4]: 4. Mémoires de Lareveillière-Lépaux publiés par son fils, 3 vols. (Paris: Plon, 1895), 1: 10–13.

[^5]: 5. Ibid., 2: 161, my italics.

[^6]: 6. Le rouge et le noir (1831), bk. I, chap. 7; for this interpretation of the passage, see Robert M. Adams, trans. and ed., Norton Critical Edition of Stendhal, Red and Black (New York: W. W. Norton, 1969), p. 34 n.1.

[^7]: 7. Stendhal, De l’amour, ed. V. Del Litto (Paris: Gallimard, 1969) bk. 1, chap. 24, p. 67, for mouvement machinal; bk. 1, chap. 3, p. 29, asterisked note, for livre d’idéologie.

[^8]: 8. On the centrality of the sensationalist model of mind to Stendhal’s novelistic vocation and technique, see Harry Levin, Gates of Horn: A Study of Five French Realists (New York: Oxford, 1966), pp. 101–4.

[^9]: 9. This generally overlooked feature of the sensationalist self has a decidedly contemporary ring, inviting comparison with the postmodern self; see D.W. Murray, “What Is the Western Concept of the Self? On Forgetting David Hume,” Ethos 21 (1993): 3–23. While not subscribing to a postmodern epistemology, William M. Reddy similarly proposes a “disaggregated” model of the self in The Navigation of Feeling: A Framework for the History of the Emotions (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), p. 95.

[^10]: 10. E. J. Lowe, Locke on Human Understanding (New York: Routledge, 1995), p. 102. For additional highly technical, late twentieth-century philosophical debate on this same point, see the essays collected in Amélie Oksenberg Rorty, ed., The Identity of Persons (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976).

[^11]: 11. The Correspondence of John Locke, 8 vols. (Oxford University Press, 1976–89), 4: 647–51, esp. 650 (Letter 1609).

[^12]: 12. See Henry E. Allison, “Locke’s Theory of Personal Identity: A Re-Examination,” in Locke on Human Understanding: Selected Essays, ed. I. C. Tipton (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977), pp. 105–22, esp. 106 and 106 n. 3. For Locke’s stipulation that all our ideas are furnished by “SENSATION” and “REFLECTION” (his capitals), see John Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, ed. Peter H. Nidditch (Oxford: Clarendon, 1975), bk. 2, chap. 1, p. 105.

[^13]: 13. Locke, Essay, bk. 2, chap. 27, para. 9–10, pp. 335–36.

[^14]: 14. Ibid., para. 20–26, quotations on pp. 344, 346. It should be pointed out that Locke does not assimilate madness to drunkenness and somnambulism. In his view (pp. 342–43), madness qualifies both as a valid legal reason for exemption from responsibility for a criminal act and as an instance of “duplication” of the self.

[^15]: 15. See Allison, “Locke’s Theory of Personal Identity,” p. 112.

[^16]: 16. David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature, ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge and P. H. Nidditch, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Clarendon, 1978), bk. 1, pt. 4, esp. pp. 251, 252, 259 for the passages quoted.

[^17]: 17. See Jørn Schøsler, John Locke et le philosophes français: La critique des idées innées en France au dix-huitième siècle (Oxford: Voltaire Foundation, 1997), p. 13. On this theme more generally, see Fernando Vidal, “Brains, Bodies, Selves, and Science: Anthropologies of Identity and the Resurrection of the Body,” Critical Inquiry 28 (2002): 930–74, esp. 950–52 on Locke’s Essay, which specified that the selfsame person would be resurrected though possibly in another body.

[^18]: 18. On this point, see the excellent discussion in R. R. Palmer, Catholics and Unbelievers in Eighteenth-Century France (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1947), chap. 6.

[^19]: 19. Jean-Nicolas-Hubert Hayer, La spiritualité et l’immortalité de l’ame, 3 vols. (Paris: Chaubert, 1757), 2: 1–3.

[^20]: 20. Ibid., pp. 6–7. Hayer also offers a spiritualist response to Locke’s argument about the discontinuity in the self introduced by deep sleep; see pp. 13–18.

[^21]: 21. Joseph-Adrien Lelarge de Lignac, Le témoignage du sens intime et de l’expérience opposé à la foi profane et ridicule des fatalistes modernes, 3 vols. (Auxerre: Fournier, 1760): 1, Preface, n.p. On Lignac, see Francisque Bouillier, Histoire de la philosophie cartésienne, 2 vols. (Paris: Durand, 1854), 2: 616–22.

[^22]: 22. Lignac, Témoignage du sens intime, 1: 392–96. In my effort to clarify Lignac, I have explicitly identified the Lockean tenets with Locke’s definition of reflection (which Lignac does not do) and have thus arrived at a simple contrast between Locke’s reflection and Lignac’s key term, the sens intime.

[^23]: 23. Essai sur l’origine des connoissances humaines, pt. I, section 1, chap. 1, para. 15, Condillac, in Oeuvres philosophiques, ed. Georges Le Roy, 3 vols. (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1947–51), 1: 14.

[^24]: 24. Le Roy, Introduction to Condillac, Oeuvres philosophiques, 1: xv.

[^25]: 25. Traité des sensations, pt. 1, chap. 6, in Oeuvres philosophiques, 1: 238–39. It should be noted that while this chapter includes the word “moi” in its title, the moi is treated in the Essai in a chapter which, implicitly denying the importance of that concept, is called “De la perception, de la conscience, de l’attention, et de la reminiscence.”

[^26]: 26. In an 1816 Sorbonne lecture, Victor Cousin would regret that it had taken so long for Hume’s corrosive argument against the sensationalist self to reach France; in that year, there was still no French translation of Hume’s Treatise. See Cousin, Premiers essais de philosophie, 3d ed. (Paris: Librairie nouvelle, 1855), pp. 57–58. To be sure, Hume’s briefer Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding (1748) was available in eighteenth-century French translation; see Baker, Condorcet, pp. 139–40; but it omitted the critical argument on personal identity.

[^27]: 27. “Lettre de M. l’abbé de Condillac à l’auteur des lettres à un Amériquain,” reprinted from the Mercure de France, April 1756, and bound with the BN copy of Condillac, Traité des animaux (Amsterdam, 1755), quotation on p. 10.

[^28]: 28. See Hume, Treatise of Human Nature, bk. 1, pt. 4, section 6, p. 253: “The mind is a kind of theatre, where several perceptions successively make their appearance; pass, re-pass, glide away, and mingle in an infinite variety of postures and situations.”

[^29]: 29. Georges-Louis Leclerc, comte de Buffon, Discours sur la nature des animaux in Oeuvres philosophiques de Buffon, ed. Jean Piveteau (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1954), pp. 317–50. Working from a very different text of Buffon, the “Essai d’arithmétique morale” (1777), Lorraine Daston has also noted the psychological accent of Buffon’s work—in this case, his probability theory; see her Classical Probability in the Enlightenment (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1988), pp. 93, 95.

[^30]: 30. Buffon, Discours sur la nature des animaux, pp. 323, 328–29, 332–33.

[^31]: 31. Condillac, Traité des animaux in Oeuvres philosophiques, 1: 342.

[^32]: 32. This is the narrative set forth in the article “Moi,” Dictionnaire des sciences philosophiques, 6 vols. (Paris: L. Hachette, 1844–52) 4: 284–85. While this Dictionnaire was produced by the followers of Victor Cousin, and much that it contains is tendentious (see chaps. 4 and 5, later), the historical sequence cited here seems accurate.

[^33]: 33. See “Ame” in Encyclopédie, ou dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers, ed. Denis Diderot and Jean Le Rond d’Alembert, 17 vols. (Paris, 1751–65), 1: 327–43, quotation on 327; and “Moi” in ibid., 10: 614–15, quotation on 614. On the debate over the âme des bêtes, see Palmer, Catholics and Unbelievers, p. 147.

[^34]: 34. The chapter in which Condillac introduced the moi as a corollary of the mental operation of reminiscence is included in a section of the book called “The Analysis and Generation of the Operations of the Ame,” an organizational device that appears to designate the moi as a subset of the âme; see Condillac, Essai, title of pt. 1, section 2.

[^35]: 35. See Locke, Essai philosophique concernant l’entendement humain, trans. Pierre Coste, 4th ed. (Amsterdam: Pierre Mortier, 1742), p. 264, n. 1. The first edition of the translation appeared in 1700.

[^36]: 36. For the well-known passages about the moi in the Pensées, see Pascal, Oeuvres complètes, ed. Jacques Chevalier (Paris: Gallimard/Pléiade, 1954), para. 130, p. 1123; para. 136, pp. 1126–27; para. 443, p. 1211. The rhetorical rule attributed to Pascal is found in Victor Cousin, Des pensées de Pascal, rapport à l’Académie française sur la nécessité d’une nouvelle édition de cette ouvrage (Paris: Ladrange, 1843), p. 45, which also quotes Pascal as saying “Christian piety annihilates the human moi” and “human civility hides and suppresses it.” For a discussion of the annihilation of the moi in Pascal’s theology, see Henri Gouhier, Blaise Pascal: conversion et apologétique (Paris: Vrin, 1986), pp. 49–53.

[^37]: 37. See Oxford English Dictionary, which gives as the chronologically first usages of “self” as a freestanding noun having the philosophical meaning of ego, works by Traherne (1674, “a secret self enclosed within”) and T. Browne (1682, “in the Theater of our selves”). Locke’s Essay on Human Understanding comes third, with the citations from pt. 2, chap. 27, para. 9, given earlier and a second citation from para. 17 of that chapter.

[^38]: 38. This is the contention of the article “Moi,” Dictionnaire des sciences philosophiques, pp. 284–85. “When [Descartes] set forth the famous proposition, ‘I think, therefore I am,’ he truly put the moi in the place of the âme . . . [and] made it pass into language. . . . Descartes said, unmistakably and deliberately, moi, instead of saying mon âme. . . .”

[^39]: 39. Discours de la méthode, in Oeuvres de Descartes, ed. Charles Adam and Paul Tannery, 11 vols. (Paris: J. Vrin, 1996), 6: 33. This edition reproduces the text of the original edition of the Discours de la méthode published in Leyden in 1637.

[^40]: 40. Ibid., p. 34.

[^41]: 41. Oeuvres philosophiques, 3. By contrast, the Dictionnaire does contain an entry for âme.

[^42]: 42. AN: F17 1344/3, Germain Baradère, “Cours de grammaire générale: 1ère année,” included with his reply to the ministerial circular of the Year VII; quotation from MS para. 48.

[^43]: 43. Antoine-Louis Claude Destutt de Tracy, Elémens d’idéologie, 3d. ed., 2 vols. (Paris: Courcier, 1817; reprint, Paris: Vrin, 1970), 1: Extrait raisonné of chaps. 1–5, pp. 391–94.

[^44]: 44. Ibid., p. 68.

[^45]: 45. Ibid., 1: 248, 397 (for the Extrait raisonné).

[^46]: 46. Ibid., 1: 136, 139, 143.

[^47]: 47. Ibid., 1: 153–55. This interpretation is borne out in a later work, Traité de la volonté et de ses effets (1st ed. 1815), where Tracy ascribes the idea of the existence of the moi to sensitivity and the idea of property to volition. I discuss this text in chap. 4, later.

[^48]: 48. P.-J.-G. Cabanis, Rapports du physique et du morale de l’homme, in Oeuvres philosophiques, ed. Claude Lehec and Jean Cazeneuve, 2 vols. (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1956), 1: 535–36.

[^49]: 49. Ibid., pp. 553–54; on p. 546 he implies that the fetus already possesses a moi.

[^50]: 50. Ibid., p. 538.

[^51]: 51. P. Laromiguière, Leçons de philosophie, ou essai sur les facultés de l’âme, 2d ed., 2 vols. (Paris: Brunot-Labbe, 1820), 1: 123 (“[L]a moralité et l’egoïsme sont deux contraires. L’homme moral se souvient qu’il a des frères; l’égoïste . . . ne connaît que son vil moi.”), 185 (“Deux conditions sont nécessaires pour que la volonté devienne liberté morale; une déliberation antérieure, pour qu’elle devienne liberté; et un but autre que l’intérêt exclusif du moi, pour qu’elle devienne morale.”)

[^52]: 52. Ibid., 1: 206–7.

[^53]: 53. Ibid., 1: 219, where the moi is implicitly equated with the sentiment de l’existence (called the sentiment de soi on p. 221), and pp. 246–47, where much the same equation is implicitly made, and Laromiguière analyzes the term “consciousness” into two distinct aspects: the soul’s “sentiment” of its existence and the soul’s “idea” of its existence.

[^54]: 54. Ibid., 1: 249–50.

[^55]: 55. These marginal notes, available at the Bibliothèque Nationale de France, have been published in J. J. Rousseau, Oeuvres complètes, ed. Bernard Gagnebin and Marcel Raymond, 4 vols. (Paris: Gallimard/Pléiade, 1969), 4: 1122–30, quotation on 1129.

[^56]: 56. See Palmer, Catholics and Unbelievers, pp. 134–35: “when he sold his library in London, [Rousseau stipulated] that this volume should not be made public before his death.”

[^57]: 57. Notice sur la vie de Sieyès (1794) in Oeuvres de Sieyès, 3 vols. (Paris: EDHIS, 1989), 3: 6–8.

[^58]: 58. I encountered the little loose pieces of paper that I have here called note cards during my own cursory examination of Sieyès’ reading notes on Condillac; see AN: 284 AP 2, Dossiers 1–2. Since that time, some of those reading notes, though not these particular “feuilles volantes,” have been edited and published; see Jacques Guilhaumou, “Le Grand Cahier Métaphysique, Présentation,” in Des manuscrits de Sieyès, 1773–1799, ed. Christine Fauré (Paris: Honoré Champion, 1999), p. 56.

[^59]: 59. “Le Grand cahier métaphysique, Manuscrit et notes,” in Manuscrits de Sieyès, ed. Fauré (henceforth, GCM), p. 77.

[^60]: 60. GCM, p. 85. According to Guilhaumou, the trope of the spectateur philosophe organized Sieyès’ conception of subjectivity during the 1770s; see Sieyès et l’ordre de la langue, pp. 15, 22.

[^61]: 61. GCM, p. 91.

[^62]: 62. See AN: 284 AP2/1, “Analogie entre l’action et la reaction” and “Foyer des sensations,” complementary notes to the reading notes on Bonnet in the GCM. My thanks to Jacques Guilhaumou for generously supplying his redactions of these texts to me; he dates the notes as 1768–70. The same passage is quoted in English translation in Murray Forsyth, Reason and Revolution: The Political Thought of the Abbé Sieyes (Leicester: Leicester University Press, 1987), pp. 43–44.

[^63]: 63. Ibid., p. 89.

[^64]: 64. This is one of the findings of Guilhaumou’s editing of the GCM; see his “Présentation” in Manuscrits de Sieyès, pp. 51, 53–55.

[^65]: 65. Guilhaumou argues that, already under the Old Regime, the category of activity was the key to Sieyès’s critical reading of Condillac and that Sieyès always conceptualized the moi in terms of a “principle of activity.” See Sieyès et l’ordre de la langue, pp. 45–46.

[^66]: 66. GCM, p. 142 and p. 142 n. 120.

[^67]: 67. The political usage was his typology of citizens as active or passive in the debates over the 1791 Constitution; see William H. Sewell, Jr., “Le citoyen/ la citoyenne: Activity, Passivity, and the Revolutionary Concept of Citizenship,” in The Political Culture of the French Revolution, ed. Colin Lucas, (Oxford: Pergamon, 1988), pp. 105–23, esp. 106–13.

[^68]: 68. See Carla Hesse, “Kant, Foucault, and Three Women,” in Foucault and the Writing of History, ed. Jan Goldstein (Oxford: Blackwell, 1994), pp. 81–98, esp. 86–89.

[^69]: 69. François Azouvi and Dominique Bourel, eds., De Königsberg à Paris: La réception de Kant en France (1788–1804) (Paris: J. Vrin, 1991), Avant-Propos, p. 11.

[^70]: 70. Ibid., p. 105.

[^71]: 71. Wilhelm von Humboldt, Journal entry of 27 May 1798, in De Königsberg à Paris, pp. 106–9.

[^72]: 72. Von Humboldt to Schiller, 23 June 1798, in ibid., pp. 109–12, quotation on p. 110.

[^73]: 73. Von Humboldt, Journal entry of 27 May 1798, p. 109.

[^74]: 74. Von Humboldt to Schiller, 23 June 1798, p. 111.

[^75]: 75. According to von Humboldt, Sieyès had been in contact with an earlier emissary of Kantianism to France, the Swiss diplomat Philippe-Albert Stapfer. The result was not happy: “Sieyès drew [from Stapfer’s lecture] the splendid conclusion that German metaphysics was to true metaphysics as astrology was to astronomy.” Wilhelm von Humboldt, Journal parisien (1797–1799), trans. Elisabeth Boyer (Arles: Actes Sud, 2001), p. 123.

[^76]: 76. See Jacques Guilhaumou, “Sieyès et la métaphysique allemande,” Annales historiques de la révolution francaise, no. 317 (1999): 513–35, esp. 513–14.

[^77]: 77. Von Humboldt, Journal entry of 27 May 1798, p. 107.

[^78]: 78. Von Humboldt to Schiller, 23 June 1798, p. 111.

[^79]: 79. Von Humboldt, Journal parisien, pp. 130–31.

[^80]: 80. Henri Gouhier dates Maine de Biran’s “conversion” to “Biranism” to 1804, when he realized that an unacknowledged “revolution” had in taken place in his own thought; see Les conversions de Maine de Biran (Paris: J. Vrin, 1947), p. 169.

[^81]: 81. George Boas, French Philosophies of the Romantic Period (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1925), p. 63.

[^82]: 82. For these biographical details, see A. de la Valette Monbrun, Maine de Biran (1766–1824): Essai de biographie historique et psychologique (Paris: Fontemoing, 1914), chap. 1.

[^83]: 83. For the full list of his political posts, see Elisabeth G. Sledziewski, “Maine de Biran devant la Révolution,” in her Révolutions du sujet (Paris: Méridiens Klincksieck, 1988), pp. 163–81, esp. 164–65.

[^84]: 84. Maine de Biran, Journal, ed. Henri Gouhier, 3 vols. (Neuchatel: La Baconnière, 1954–57), 3: 17–18 (25 December 1794).

[^85]: 85. Quoted in François Azouvi, Maine de Biran: La science de l’homme (Paris: J. Vrin, 1995), p. 14.

[^86]: 86. See Maine de Biran, Journal 1: 68 (24 April 1815); 128 (12 May 1816); and 3: 9 (27 May 1794).

[^87]: 87. See, for a similar treatment of the journal, Agnès Antoine, Maine de Biran: Sujet et politique (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1999). I learned of this work only after I had completed writing my own account of Biran.

[^88]: 88. Maine de Biran, Journal, 1: 20–23, 26.

[^89]: 89. Ibid., 1: 19 (22 September 1814).

[^90]: 90. Ibid., 1: 129 (16 May 1816).

[^91]: 91. Ibid., 1: 19 (20 September 1814), 24 (17 October 1814).

[^92]: 92. Ibid., 3: 3 (27 May 1794).

[^93]: 93. Ibid., 3: 13–14 (25 December 1794).

[^94]: 94. Ibid., 3: 8, 17.

[^95]: 95. Ibid., 3: 17 (25 December 1794).

[^96]: 96. Ibid., 1: 234 (19 November 1816), italics in the original.

[^97]: 97. Ibid., 3: 6 (27 May 1794).

[^98]: 98. Ibid., 3: 15–17 (25 December 1794).

[^99]: 99. Ibid., 1: 53–54 (4 April 1815).

[^100]: 100. Ibid., 1: 49 (26 March 1815), my italics.

[^101]: 101. Ibid., 1: 61 (12 April 1815).

[^102]: 102. Ibid., 3: 18–19 (25 December 1794).

[^103]: 103. Ibid., 1: 36 (1 January 1815), italics in the original.

[^104]: 104. Ibid., 1: 91–92 (21 June 1815, 22 June 1815).

[^105]: 105. Ibid., 1: 176 (23 July 1816), italics in the original.

[^106]: 106. Ibid., 2: 95 (25 November 1817).

[^107]: 107. On Maine de Biran’s criteria for a science of psychology, see Azouvi, Maine de Biran, pp. 207–15.

[^108]: 108. On the weight of the manuscripts shipped by Maine de Biran’s son in 1843 and 1844 to Ernest Naville, his father’s biographer, see Gouhier, “Introduction” to Maine de Biran, Journal, 1: x.
