## 4 An A Priori Self for the Bourgeois Male: Victor Cousin’s Project

Dinner at the Ecole polytechnique with Monsieur D . . . and the young philosophy professor Cousin. We spoke a great deal about metaphysics, and I was pleased with myself; I thought the others were, too. I laid out my mode of conceptualization . . . , explain[ing it] to my young professor, who grasped it wonderfully (à merveille).

Maine de Biran, Journal, 1816

Among the educated Frenchmen troubled by the defective, fragmented sensationalist self, none was more dogged in his pursuit of it than Victor Cousin. A junior participant in Maine de Biran’s exclusive metaphysical society during the early years of the Restoration, he had a glint in his eye, a capacity to grasp ideas “à merveille,” that made a strong impression on the philosopher from the Périgord. By 1821, Maine de Biran felt sure that, despite his excessive fervor (une tête trop ardente)—apparently a coded reference to fondness for German idealism—the “young professor Cousin” was the “hope of the true philosophy among us.”[^1] In fact, even as the older man penned those lines, Cousin was busy rescuing Biranian insights from oblivion. What he chose to leave out of his own philosophical mix would prove almost as significant as what he selected for inclusion.

A derivative philosopher, though one who enjoyed a vastly inflated reputation in his own era, the mature Cousin possessed in the more workaday occupation of academic entrepreneur a degree of talent that bordered on genius. By producing and then successfully institutionalizing a new system of psychological knowledge designed to usurp the place of sensationalism, he stamped on French culture a mark that lasted at least until the end of the nineteenth century. Scholarship on Cousin has long stressed his achievement in professionalizing philosophy as an academic discipline in France and implanting his own brand of it in the state system of higher education.[^2] My argument in this chapter and the next builds on that foundation. At the same time, however, it shifts the focus to the specifically psychological component of Cousin’s philosophy and the way it served, in the context of the classroom, deliberately to inculcate a certain kind of selfhood.

Though a sworn enemy of psychological fragmentation, Cousin proved addicted to fragments of another sort. He never produced a sustained, synthetic work of philosophy. The volumes that he named (ironically, for a man so devoted to holism) Fragmens philosophiques comprised a large portion of his philosophical output; and faute de mieux, the carefully worded prefaces to those volumes, which contained some of his most important statements of philosophical position, were treated by contemporaries as intellectual events of the highest magnitude. Published versions of his university courses made up the rest of his philosophical corpus. The master did not literally write this latter group of works, which were instead direct transcriptions of the notes he had used in class, sometimes supplemented by the notes taken by members of his student audience. No wonder that Cousin defended himself preemptively against charges of incompleteness and incoherence, observing early on that “a course should not be judged like a book”[^3] “Entirely fragmentary, fine aperçus on a large number of philosophical topics but no developed system”—such was the verdict on Cousin’s philosophy that the basically sympathetic philosopher Adolphe Garnier delivered privately to the young Ernest Renan in 1846.[^4]

In the 1826 preface to one of his collections of fragments, Cousin rehearsed his complaint against sensationalism, the “sad philosophy” that had immediately preceded his own. “It is an incontestable fact,” he asserted, “that in eighteenth-century England and France, Locke and Condillac supplanted the great antecedent schools and that they have remained supreme until today. Instead of being irritated (s’irriter) by that fact, we must try to understand it.”[^5] Even in this brief and apparently straightforward remark, Cousin displays his pugnacity and sharp wit. In the scientific idiom of the period, irritation was a manifestation of nervous sensibility, a virtual synonym for sensation. Cousin was saying, then, that sensation-irritation is only the first, primitive stage of mental response to a phenomenon; understanding is a higher stage and, pace Condillac, is not reducible to sensation. Far be it from Cousin, then, who predicated his entire philosophical career on transcending mere sensation, to cease his examination of Locke and Condillac at the elementary stage of irritation! His epistemology shielded him from such pettiness.

Before considering Cousin’s larger agenda, we need to look once again at the predecessor who so famously got under his skin and ask in what the ascendancy of Condillac consisted in the several decades following the Revolution.

### Vernacular Knowledge: The Status of Sensationalism circa 1830

Part of this story is well known and has already been alluded to in Chapter 3. A group of continuators of Condillac, wedded to idéologie, or the newly invented science of the generation of ideas from sensory impressions, and calling themselves idéologistes, were catapulted to positions of institutional power under the Directory and the Consulate. Most important among them were A.-L.-C. Destutt de Tracy and the physician P.-J.-G. Cabanis. From an informal organization centered on the salon of Madame Helvétius in Auteuil, the group rose to control of the Second Class (Moral and Political Sciences) of the Institut de France, founded in 1795 as a restoration of official academic culture; at the same time, they propagated their views through their journal, the Décade philosophique.

During this period sensationalism continued to be the intellectual fashion in many strata of society. In the early years of the nineteenth century, for example, the Duchesse de Courlande, a member of the transnational European aristocracy, chose as a tutor for her daughter a certain Florentine abbé, Scipion Piattoli, “who believed that Condillac . . . [was] a surer guide than the Gospel.”[^6] At about the same date, the bourgeois Stendhal larded his letters to his sister Pauline with admonitions to read Condillac. Sending her a pocket-sized edition of the Logique, which he described as the book “people are making such a fuss about”—the year was 1802—he proposed that they work together on a page a week and predicted that once they had completed two chapters at this pace she would be able to tackle the rest alone. The Logique was “the easiest thing in the world if you come to it with a mind free of prejudice.” And once having mastered the book “your progress will no longer be impeded in any science,” whether algebra or grammar, “for logic is nothing but the art of reasoning.”[^7]

The official ouster of the Idéologues was as swift their entry into official favor. A period of mutual infatuation between the group and Napoleon succumbed to misgivings on both sides as the authoritarian streak in Napoleon’s politics intensified. As early as 1800 the government press referred to the self-identified idéologistes as “idéologues,” a new coinage meant to smack of derision that became, ironically, the standard name for the group.[^8] The Law of 11 floréal Year X (May 1, 1802) abolished the central schools and replaced them with lycées, a new institution that, purged of such characteristically Idéologue courses as drawing and general grammar, restored Latin to its pre-Revolutionary pedagogical prominence.[^9] In 1803 Napoleon’s Minister of the Interior Chaptal reorganized the Institut, purposely closing the Idéologues’ base of operations, the Second Class. And in a famous tirade before the Conseil d’Etat in 1812, the emperor declared his former intellectual allies proponents of a “dark metaphysics” who, believing they could found laws on abstract philosophical principles, were responsible for “all the misfortunes that have befallen our beautiful France.”[^10]

The chief carrier of the philosophy of Condillac during the philosophically confused periods of the Consulate, Empire, and Restoration (1800–30) was the minor Idéologue, Pierre Laromiguière, whom we already encountered in Chapter 3. A representative instance of the species, Laromiguière had taken the cloth in 1773 as a member of the Pères de la Doctrine Chrétienne, one of the secular teaching orders that served as an important locus of the dissemination of Condillac under the Old Regime. True to type, Laromiguière had experienced an intellectual conversion when, sometime after 1780, he happened upon a copy of Condillac’s Logique and, the scales duly falling from his eyes, he renounced the Aristotelianism and Cartesianism in which he had been educated. It was the philosophy of Condillac that he taught at the Collège d’Esquile in Toulouse, entering into a polemic on the subject with the Aristotelian rector of the institution who, true to the reputation for intellectual freedom enjoyed by the Pères de la Doctrine Chrétienne, never prevented the younger man from speaking his mind before his students. In 1790, when the Revolution abolished the religious orders, Laromiguière continued to teach at Esquile, though in the new status of an employee of the French state. He soon renounced his religious vocation, minimal to begin with, and wholeheartedly embraced the identity of philosophy professor.[^11]

At the height of the Terror, Laromiguière published his class notes on Condillac in the form of a concise manual for students entitled Projet d’élémens de métaphysique. This little brochure attracted the attention of several of members of the Committee on Public Instruction (then charged with producing a curriculum for the new republic), including that avid reader of Condillac, the abbé Sieyès.[^12]

Fortified by powerful patrons, Laromiguière continued to advance on the career ladder. Clearly ripe for the picking when the central schools were founded, he was named professor of logic, then of history, and finally and appropriately, of general grammar in the central schools of Paris.[^13] In 1809 he received a post of uniquely strategic importance, the professorship of philosophy at the newly established Faculty of Letters of Paris. His lectures, praised for their clarity, elegance and vivacity, soon attracted a large audience that included not only students but a broad swath of intellectually cultivated Parisians.[^14] Although Laromiguière’s adherence to Condillac may have become subtly inflected by this date—some commentators would later see his emphasis on an active faculty of attention as a bridge to the Cousinian philosophy[^15]—his first lesson proudly bore the hallmarks of Idéologie, announcing that the philosophical method was one of “decomposition, that is to say, analysis.”[^16] Indeed in his formal opening lecture, given belatedly in 1811, he read from the job description drawn up by the University Council (Conseil de l’Université), indicating the administration’s assumption that he would construe his subject matter in a thoroughly sensationalist fashion: “He [the philosophy professor] will principally set out to show the origin and successive developments of our ideas.”[^17]

Despite the small size and somewhat “shadowy” existence of the Paris Faculty of Letters at this date,[^18] its philosophy chair had a symbolic importance that enhanced the status—and the vulnerability—of the occupant. Any changes in the philosophical preferences of the political regime would be registered at this extremely visible point in the academic hierarchy. Thus in 1813, when Napoleon had become convinced that Idéologie was absolutely inimical to the Empire, he removed Laromiguière de facto, allowing him to retreat into nonthreatening obscurity as a university librarian. Replacing him in the spotlight was Pierre-Paul Royer-Collard, the spokesman of a new and still inchoate French philosophical tendency that would subsequently be nurtured by conversations with Maine de Biran and, eventually, flourish luxuriantly at the hands of Royer-Collard’s suppléant, or substitute lecturer, Victor Cousin.

But this conspicuous removal did not put an end to Laromiguière or his school. Laromiguière published his Leçons in the waning days of the Empire and continued to attract disciples, whom he trained informally through daily chats at the library. In 1820, shaken by the assassination of the Duc de Berry, the Restoration monarchy made an unexpected and perhaps erroneous calculation. It decided that the government of the reinstalled Bourbons was more philosophically jeopardized by the new school of Royer-Collard and Cousin, which had by that date declared for the liberal opposition, than by the old, Revolution-tainted school of Condillac. Accordingly it silenced Royer-Collard and his substitute, Cousin, and brought back Laromiguière to his podium at the Faculty, investing the old Idéologue with the power to determine the official philosophy of the now thoroughly royalist and pro-clerical regime.[^19] This surprising reversal may well have stemmed from the conviction of the abbé de Frayssinous, as minister of public instruction, that the anti-metaphysical nature of sensationalism made it far less dangerous to Catholic orthodoxy than was the new school of Cousin, with its combination of resolute secularism and metaphysical pretension.[^20] In any case, the reversal must have gladdened the heart of Stendhal, who had earlier envisioned a rapprochement between the Restoration monarchy and the intellectual currents of the Enlightenment. Almost immediately after the fall of Napoleon in 1814, he had prepared a proposal to Louis XVIII for the establishment of a Royal College of Peers that would give the sons of the nobility the sort of “liberal education” of which they had been robbed by “our civil dissensions.” The projected curriculum included Bentham, Adam Smith, J. B. Say, Montesquieu and, one of the few texts mentioned by name, “the Idéologie of Tracy.”[^21]

In an intellectual climate in which sensationalism still enjoyed support in important circles, it is not surprising that a Cours d’etude pour l’instruction des jeunes gens par Condillac—a selection from the master’s key texts along the lines of Bérenger’s 1789 anthology—appeared in ten pocket-sized volumes in 1821, its front matter noting that the “success enjoyed” by the unspecified original had inspired this new edition.[^22] Or that early in 1830, shortly before Charles X was dethroned, the University Council approved as a textbook the Abeille encyclopédique, a brief survey of the sum total of human knowledge that included a long entry on Idéologie.[^23] A recent quantitative study of the editions and reeditions of Condillac’s logical, psychological, and grammatical works from the mid-eighteenth century through the early decades of the nineteenth makes the point clearly. It found that the “dizzingly steep increase” after 1770 tapered off only around 1830, leading the author to conclude that, for the entire period in question, “Condillac’s influence simply cannot be overestimated.”[^24]

Nor, then, is it unusual that Jean Saphary, a disciple of Laromiguière, used his position as professor of philosophy at the Royal College of Nancy to disseminate sensationalism in Lorraine in the 1820s.[^25] Or that another disciple, A. J. H. Valette, whom Laromiguière chose as his substitute at the Faculty in 1829, delivered in that year a rousing defense of the school of Condillac scarcely qualified by his acknowledgment of the validity of certain typically nineteenth-century criticisms of the Enlightenment. Yes, Valette conceded, the eighteenth-century philosophes had relied excessively on the rhetorical device of ridicule; yes, they had lacked that historical sensibility that accords respect to the past and seeks to fathom it; and yes, their project was more successful in the domain of the physical and mathematical sciences than in that of the moral sciences. But, he continued, they had nonetheless “left a long streak of light.” Through their devotion to disseminating their philosophy and its practical applications, they had changed the face of France:

> Had they done nothing more than to popularize (rendre populaire), by their many fine applications of method, the need to see each thing clearly and to make oneself understood, what gratitude would such a service merit! However “impoverished” or “meager” one finds the philosophy of Condillac, experience still proves that young minds that have . . . been early on habituated to the [mental] procedures that it reveals to us under so simple and naive a guise are soon filled with wonder at the rapidity of their progress in the quest for truth.[^26]

For Valette, the heart of the school of Condillac was its pedagogy. He dwelt at length on Condillac’s course of instruction for the prince of Parma, the late text that the Revolution made canonical. “Called to the education of a prince, whose life can so powerfully influence the future of the people who must live under his laws,” Condillac had stressed cognitive self-knowledge, familiarity with the operations of the human understanding, and the use of the method of genetic analysis to foster reliance on the individual’s own intellectual powers. “In every case, only one thing is important, to figure out how we took the first step because, in order that there be progress, it suffices that we continue as we began.” The method of analysis had, Valette attested, served him well as a young man assailed by competing intellectual currents in the opening decades of the nineteenth century. “The study of the [mental] faculties that was prescribed to us as the way to attain necessary truths enabled me to find a resting place [literally oreiller, or pillow] sweeter than the one afforded by doubt.” Valette declared himself convinced of the continuing ascendancy of sensationalism in France: “The school of Locke and Condillac is still that of the great majority. . . . [T]he distinctive taste of our nation for perfect clarity will last a long time still.”[^27]

That the sensationalist camp had not given up the fight even after the July Revolution is evident in the attempt of the aging Idéologue P. C. F. Daunou to block the automatic inclusion of Cousin in the Academy of Moral and Political Sciences when that body was founded in 1832 as a self-conscious reincarnation of the Second Class of the Napoleonic Institut. Reportedly, and no doubt rightly, Daunou feared that Cousin’s partisanship would dominate the election of new members, causing eclecticism, the so-called “German school,” to wipe out Idéologie as an intellectual force within the new institution.[^28]

But even if sensationalism eventually lost the battle for the Academy and other such institutional contests, it displayed impressive staying power. The sensationalist philosopher Valette was not alone in his early nineteenth-century testament to the perdurance of sensationalism in France. Several mainstays of the Cousinian camp echoed him. Perhaps the Cousinian philosopher Francisque Bouillier was only exaggerating the strength of the enemy for purposes of keeping the troops bellicose. But his remarks in 1844 concur with Valette’s assessment that sensationalism provided a kind of intellectual bedrock in early nineteenth-century France and achieved the status of what might be called a vernacular knowledge[^29]—that is, a set of propositions so thoroughly assimilated into the mental habits of a culture that it was accepted almost as a matter of common sense and could not be readily unseated by means of fiats delivered from the top of the political or academic hierarchies. Said Bouillier:

> In order that a new philosophy [i.e., Cousinianism] bear all its fruits, it is not sufficient that it reign among scholars. . . ., that it dethrone and topple the old philosophy. It is not even sufficient that it occupy its place uncontested. It is also necessary that it seep, so to speak, into the ideas of a large number of people, that it penetrate scholarship, literature, customs and attitudes and, finally, legislation. Now such a mental revolution can take place only slowly and cumulatively. Thus while it is very certain that, from a scholarly standpoint, sensationalism no longer exists, it is nonetheless certain that its principles and its consequences still live on. . . .[^30]

That, too, was the opinion of the medical journalist Louis Peisse, a more unusual figure, sociologically speaking, who seems to have been Cousin’s only conspicuous supporter in the Paris medical world of the period, a milieu dominated by a tendency to physiological reductionism. To be sure, Peisse deplored what he called “the school designated today by the name of sensualiste” and acknowledged that its major theorists were all dead (the dwindling of the cohort had, of course, been Daunou’s problem at the time of the founding of the Academy of Moral and Political Sciences). But he nonetheless testified in 1840 to the abiding power of sensationalism over the French way of thinking. Not only did an array of sciences—the physical and natural, the physiological, even the economic and political—continue to bear its deep imprint. Peisse’s claim went further. Of the several philosophical schools coexisting in France at that date, he contended, sensationalism was “certainly the largest, the most popular and, in a way, the most national.”[^31]

A third but effectively “closeted” Cousinian, Caroline Angebert, voiced the same opinion in a letter at the end of the Restoration. Expressing her very partisan belief that sensationalist psychology had “already [been] repulsed by the intellectual leadership,” she regarded that blow as far from definitive. For instead of disappearing, sensationalism had “taken refuge” among “the masses,” where it presently flourished, “still transmitted from father to son.”[^32] In this tacit theory of intellectual percolation, the discarded hand-me-downs of the intelligentsia were paraded as high fashion among the popular classes.

What Cousin was up against, then, was—perhaps in actual fact but certainly in a unanimously agreed upon rhetorical representation—a technically outdated but still potent psychology. As a form of vernacular knowledge able to lay claim to the attribute of “Frenchness,” sensationalism would not be easy to extirpate.

### Improbable Guru: Cousin’s Early Career

Cousin’s brand of psychology took shape and made its debut under the Empire and Restoration, the same period of rudderless intellectual flux that saw Laromiguière’s influence wax, wane, and then wax again.[^33]

Given the fact that he became such a permanent and imposing fixture on the nineteenth-century French cultural scene, it is striking how little is known about Cousin’s background and early years. The same shreds of information are everywhere repeated, the very paucity of embellishment lending them almost mythic status. Born in Paris in 1792, Cousin was, we are told, the son of poor but literate working-class parents. His father was a jeweler (the occupation he listed on Victor’s birth certificate), but accounts of Cousin’s origins often represented him as a watchmaker, a variant that adds intriguing if largely inappropriate Rousseauean overtones to the story. His mother was a laundress. Although Cousin “almost never spoke of them,”[^34] he did share with Jules Simon one poignant, emblematic detail: their lodgings were reached by means of a primitive contraption more resembling a ladder than a staircase.[^35] That the unpropitious circumstances of Cousin’s birth did not limit his social horizons was, the standard story continues, the combined result of his inherent nobility of character and a happy accident. He protected a schoolmate bullied by the other children, and the boy’s grateful mother offered to subsidize his education. Hence, instead of learning a manual trade, he attended the Lycée Charlemagne, one of the best secondary schools in the capital at this date. By dint of hard work and native intelligence, he then passed the rigorous examination for the Ecole normale supérieure, the hatchery of the French professoriate and intelligentsia, in 1810 at the age of eighteen. He belonged to the Ecole’s very first class after its post-Revolutionary reestablishment, and his score on the entrance examination had been the highest of all the applicants. Membership in the intellectual elite was now within his reach.[^36]

Born, according to some, under the Rousseauean sign of a paternal watchmaker and compelled to lift himself by his own bootstraps, Cousin might seem to have had all the makings of a democrat. But, in fact, his developmental trajectory turned him into a liberal of a distinctly conservative stripe and a rabid antidemocrat. The “mere name of democracy never reached his ears without causing him obvious displeasure,” one of his disciples remarked a few years after his death.[^37] And in a letter to Royer-Collard in 1833, Cousin made much the same point when noting how the vagaries of classical Greek political practice had influenced the political philosophy of his beloved Plato. As Cousin reconstructed the linkage, Plato failed to perceive the full potential of monarchy because he was familiar only with the unpalatable example of Sparta, yet he correctly opposed democracy because he had an instance of it “right before his eyes”![^38]

The milieu of Cousin’s formative adolescent years, which doubled as the environment he inhabited during most of his subsequent career, helps to explain his political views. He forged his adult identity in the newly established Université, as the Napoleonic state educational corporation was called. A giant bureaucratic apparatus, pyramidal in structure, the Université aimed at providing a centrally supervised and nationally uniform system of education. At the top of the pyramid was a Grand Master, advised by the University Council; at the next level were the artificially created educational districts called “academies,” each headed by a rector having his own advisory council. At both the central and academy levels, inspectors visited and reported on the component teaching institutions—the lycées, the other secondary schools, and the faculties. The Université was, in other words, a very different institutional entity from a “university,” as that term was construed elsewhere in nineteenth-century Europe. Its primary purpose was teaching rather than research, the transmission to adolescents of already validated knowledge, not the production of new knowledge.[^39] As the premier training institution for lycée teachers, the Ecole normale supérieure was an integral part of the structure, while the Ecole polytechnique, the Collège de France, and the Muséum d’histoire naturelle were placed outside it as loci of research.[^40]

The Université also functioned as a giant meritocratic machine repeatedly skimming the cream off the student body through a series of ritualized examinations. This mechanism, so decisive a force in Cousin’s personal destiny, may have instilled his belief in a deserving intellectual aristocracy and his corresponding hostility toward the automatic all-inclusiveness of democracy. From a global perspective, the meritocratic operations of the Université can be seen as an instance of French precocity. According to Alan Spitzer’s apt description, “The virtually universal pattern of the organization of higher education in the modern world—socialization and training of an elite in age-segregated institutions—had already assumed its characteristic French form” by the second decade of the nineteenth century.[^41]

The Université thus additionally became the locus of the formation of generational identity. As Spitzer has brilliantly argued, it was by encountering and reencountering one another in the halls of academe that the members of a particular age-cohort acquired the sense that their shared year of birth created a bond of a special sort; they constituted a generation, or a historical entity with a distinctive outlook.[^42] Insofar as it can be schematized, the defining feature of Cousin’s generation was its position, both chronological and ideological, vis-à-vis the Revolution. They were, in at least two senses, post-Revolutionary: they inherited the social fluidity and career open to talent that the Revolution had secured; and they rejected as naive the political idealism that the Revolution had attempted to actualize. The decades of upheaval following 1789 had convinced them that mandates for sociopolitical change needed to be carefully evaluated and balanced by some countervailing force, be that force the partial retention of traditional arrangements that had proved their mettle over time or a mode of organic reasoning and/or feeling that could complement the corrosive effects of unmitigated analytic and critical reason. The generational concept played an important role in Cousin’s success. Recognizing his message at the lectern as crystallizing their own age-based view of things, students selected him de facto as the spokesman for their post-Revolutionary generational consciousness.

The environment of the Université in its early years was not entirely inhospitable to political radicalism. The Ecole normale contributed student recruits to the Carbonarist revolt of 1820; even the young faculty member Victor Cousin may have lent a hand despite his later denials of involvement.[^43] Still, it is probably not accidental that the Ecole polytechnique, existing outside the strict purview of the Université, rather than the Ecole normale, spawned the movement known as Saint-Simonian socialism.[^44] And for those individuals who became professional universitaires—the teachers and administrators comprising the educational corporation—and who thus remained permanently within its bureaucratic carapace, the Université not surprisingly fostered an incremental attitude toward social change and a predilection for bureaucratic solutions to social problems. Certainly that was to be its long-term effect on Cousin.

Finally, as suggested in the Introduction to this book, the Université was one embodiment of the French state’s post-Revolutionary mission to “produce society” in the absence of the recently destroyed corporations. By training civil servants to man the state’s administrative apparatus, it also served as a major locus of production of the new post-Revolutionary social elite—the bourgeosie. As such, it formed the young working-class Cousin in an elitist bourgeois mold and, in turn, prepared him to embark upon his own chief assignment, which might be described as the pedagogical production and reproduction of bourgeois subjectivity.

The single most powerful influence on the young Cousin was a denizen of the Université. Pierre-Paul Royer-Collard not only recruited Cousin to the party of so-called Doctrinaire constitutional monarchism but also showed by his own example how effortlessly that political position meshed with an anti-sensationalist stance in philosophy. It was he who brought Cousin to the meetings of Maine de Biran’s metaphysical society, thus furthering the avant-garde psychological education of his protégé. The affection and loyalty that marked their relationship can be seen in the steady stream of letters that passed between them after the aging Royer-Collard left Paris for the provinces, each man routinely addressing the other as “mon cher ami.”[^45] Royer-Collard had taught philosophy at the Ecole normale before moving in 1810 to the new chair in the history of philosophy at the Paris Faculty of Letters. Cousin followed him like a shadow, assuming the posts that Royer-Collard vacated and apparently finding a role model in the older man’s gravitation to the sphere of educational administration. It is far from immediately obvious that Royer-Collard, who single handedly founded a new school of French academic philosophy by importing the common sense philosophy of Thomas Reid from Scotland, would have wanted to run a bureaucracy. Yet in 1815 he resigned his Sorbonne chair in practice, while retaining it in name, in order to preside over the Council of Public Instruction, a post that he held until 1819.[^46] This jack-of-all-trades versatility, whereby the producer of knowledge then oversees its educational dissemination, was possible because of the rudimentary condition of the Université at this date. What made it desirable—and why Cousin would later emulate it—was the Doctrinaire understanding of the post-Revolutionary political situation of France.

A small group of engaged and, eventually, very powerful intellectuals of the post-Revolutionary generation, the Doctrinaires included from their inception Royer-Collard and François Guizot, the best-selling historian who would serve the July Monarchy as minister of public instruction from 1832–36 and, ultimately, as prime minister during the 1840s. That Royer-Collard was a Jansenist and Guizot a Protestant was of more than anecdotal significance: in the era of resurgent clericalism that followed Napoleon’s repair of the breach with Rome, Doctrinaire thought was marked by its refusal to rely on the Catholic Church to organize and monitor society. The group seemed to pop up almost everywhere during the Restoration and July Monarchy, militating for reform of the penal code and for the abolition of slavery, lobbying for public hygiene, aid to orphaned children, and the establishment of asylums for the insane. Their collective name is misleading. Although they were said to employ pedantic and sententious language (the accusation from which the name derived), initially at least they lacked a highly elaborated doctrine.[^47] Indeed wariness of doctrine may have been their hallmark. As Pierre Rosanvallon, one of their most recent (and sympathetic) interpreters, has pointed out, they never produced a major treatise of political philosophy, being more concerned with the day-to-day pragmatics of reconstructing and restabilizing France after its Revolutionary tumult than with abstract pronouncements about the ideal polity.[^48] After all, the Revolution had offered ample evidence of the impotence of abstract political prescriptions.

As Rosanvallon restates Guizot’s political position, which can roughly stand for that of the Doctrinaires as a whole, it turned on a recognition of the new, modern relationship between politics and society. Premodern power had, in Guizot’s view, resided securely in specific individuals and families; modern power, by contrast, could be found “everywhere,” circulating rapidly, impersonally, and almost invisibly through society and necessitating for the first time that the state actively reckon with “the masses.” Hence new methods of government had to be, in Guizot’s words, “internal” to society rather than “external” to it; constitutional political rulers had to busy themselves with creating “institutions, whereas despots had merely formed instruments.”[^49] Always at the ready, the state bureaucracy became in the Doctrinaire view the obvious means for crafting the institutions that, firmly located in society, would make modern governance feasible.[^50] Chief among those institutions were the public schools that, placed under the supervision of the Université, already had one foot in the state. To produce new forms of knowledge and then disseminate them by means of the school system was thus a characteristically Doctrinaire procedure for the modernization of political power. To be sure, the trajectory of Idéologie under the Revolution had already supplied a concrete precedent in this regard. But not until the Doctrinaires was such a broad-gauged theoretical rationale for it advanced.

Guizot devised an idiosyncratic vocabulary to articulate the intimate connection that he envisioned between knowledge and political power. He spoke of the “government of minds” and of “governing by the management of minds, not by the upheaval of ways of life.”[^51] A disciple of Cousin expressed the same position more baldly during the 1840s. In the Revue des deux mondes, Jules Simon announced that the pressing problem of the day—what he called “the true social question”—was, contrary to many contemporary pundits, neither the organization of labor nor the need for electoral reform. Rather “the first and foremost question everywhere and always, but especially in those places where liberty is proclaimed as fact and as right, is education.” And if education, and in particular education in philosophy, had such salience, it was because its content would eventually “penetrate to the lowest ranks of society, become the common patrimony, and give the civilization of an epoch its distinctive, historically recognizable character.”[^52]

In light of this Doctrinaire vision, it is clear that for Cousin the enterprise of philosophy was, at least from the moment that he fell under Royer-Collard’s influence, necessarily linked to post-Revolutionary political concerns. He described in simple but revealing language the annual inspection of the third-year philosophy class at the Ecole normale, which he taught between 1815 and 1820, by the president of the Council of Public Instruction, then Royer-Collard: “As a philosopher and as a man of state, Monsieur Royer-Collard took a double interest in our work.”[^53] As an ally of the Doctrinaires, Cousin unabashedly avowed the connection between his philosophy and his politics, finding in that connection nothing of a dubious or compromising nature. These avowals became starker and more pointed with the passage of time. In a letter to Hegel of 1826 imploring the great German metaphysician to criticize the preface to a just-published collection of his Sorbonne lectures (the “Preface . . . alone is readable,” he observed, indicating his personal hierarchization of his philosophical writings), Cousin also registered his intention to press his philosophical oeuvre into service for the political rehabilitation of France. “Be all the more pitiless,” he exhorted Hegel, “knowing that, since I am determined to be useful to my country, I will always take the liberty of modifying the directives of my German masters according to the needs and condition, such as it is, of this poor country.” Hegel never replied.[^54]

In his celebrated lecture series of 1828, when he was allowed to return to his Sorbonne podium after eight years of silence imposed by the far-right faction within the restored Bourbon monarchy, Cousin publicly declared the formal analogies that made his philosophical system congruent with his political views. Labeling that philosophical system eclecticism and stressing its combination of the best of a variety of competing philosophical traditions, he declared that it replicated the mixture of monarchical, aristocratic, and democratic elements in the French constitution, the Charter of 1814. This striking formal analogy lent his philosophical creed additional authority. “I ask, when everything around us is mixed, complex, commingled, when all the opposites live and prosper together, if it is possible for philosophy to escape the general spirit; I ask if philosophy could be other than eclectic . . .”[^55] At the beginning of the July Monarchy, when he and the other Doctrinaires had become political insiders, he proclaimed with laconic boldness in print, “My political faith conforms in every respect to my philosophical faith.”[^56] By that time, of course, the Doctrinaire political position had shed its earlier elusiveness and had been boiled down into a catchword that underscored its family resemblance with the eclectic philosophy: the juste-milieu, or the golden mean between extremes.[^57]

But if Cousin could never entirely separate philosophy from politics, in his initial public incarnation during the Restoration he was perceived by his adoring Sorbonne audience far more as a pure, incandescent intellect than as a politician. That audience was dominated by young men, under the age of thirty and, although Hippolyte Taine would much later derisively describe the mature Cousinian philosophy as a “nice relaxing tepid bath into which fathers dip their children as a healthful precaution,”[^58] there can be no doubt that its impact on his early audience was exactly the opposite: wildly exhilarating. Part of that exhilaration owed to the new generational consciousness that had crystallized around Cousin. Stunningly young himself—only nineteen when he became a tutor (élève répétiteur) at the Ecole normale supérieure and a mere twenty-three when he first mounted the podium of the Sorbonne—Cousin was disowning the putatively arid analytic style of the previous century in favor of a new, affirmative mode of thought and feeling. “The eighteenth century was the age of criticism and destruction. The nineteenth century must be that of intelligent rehabilitation,” Cousin told his audience in 1817.[^59]

Cousin cared too much about reason to be a full-fledged Romantic, but his recognition of the insufficiency of reason, as well as the prose style that accompanied that recognition, sufficed to qualify him as a generic romantic. At this historical juncture, Romanticism was routinely seen as an expression of youth. In Racine et Shakespeare (1823), his famous pamphlet on the relative merits of the classic and romantic literary modes, Stendhal recounts a conversation he (supposedly) had with a theater manager about the artistic preferences of students at the medical and law faculties and attributes to himself the following retort, “But sir, the vast majority of well-bred youth have been converted to Romanticism by the eloquence of Monsieur Cousin.”[^60] So much did the young Cousin harp on the virtues of youth that he could even get himself into a situation verging on self-parody. In December 1819, returning to his Sorbonne podium after a bout of illness, he referred to “my weak state of health” and warned his students, “No longer expect from me that ardor, that vivacity of youth that corresponds to yours; it is lost, perhaps irretrievably.”[^61] Cousin was at the time twenty-seven years old and would live to the age of seventy-six!

Part of the exhilaration about Cousin derived from his oratory, a talent that even his most bitter opponents grudgingly acknowledged during the 1820s. The arch-detractor Armand Marrast could not contain his perverse admiration for Cousin’s stirring lecturing style. Cousin, he said, “speaks like a high priest; his rich intonation, his mobile features, his weighty and cadenced diction, the painful childbirth of a thought that seems to have gestated in his gut—everything he does favors the impression that he makes on his audience.”[^62] An equally fierce opponent, Auguste Comte, arrived at the same conclusion. Although Cousin offered his students an unreliable account of contemporary German philosophy, he had, according to Comte, succeeded in acquiring a fanatic following because “he possesses one of the essential skills of the Ciceronian orator—gesture and facial expression.”[^63] Looking back on the 1828 lecture series from the distance of almost three decades, Hippolyte Taine stressed the difference between the oral styles of Cousin and his sensationalist predecessors:

> We were all a little German . . .; we ran [to hear Cousin] the way people run to the opera; and in truth it was an opera. In the space of an hour, the impetuous orator brought onstage and paraded before us God, nature, humanity. . . .; this symphony sung by a single man inspired vertigo, and minds accustomed to the calm disquisitions of the sensationalists gave themselves over . . . to the poet who populated their imaginations with such prodigious phantoms. . . .[^64]

Alan Spitzer has rightly noted that the excitement surrounding Cousin in the 1820s “puts a considerable strain on our [late twentieth-century] historical empathy.”[^65] When we read the texts of his 1828 lectures, we comprehend only with great difficulty why Cousin’s original presentation of them qualified as Restoration-style media events, attracting swarms of journalists and even prompting a market-conscious publisher to hire stenographers (until then used only to record parliamentary proceedings) so that each lecture could be immediately printed and sold in pamphlet form.[^66] The accumulation of documentary evidence, however, leaves no doubt that early in his career Cousin attained the status of a youth guru. For most of the Restoration, the symbiosis of power and knowledge that was later blatantly—and, to some, cynically—epitomized by his thought seems to have lingered below the surface, well out of sight. Cousin appeared as an inspired sage, not as a sordid calculator. The view from across the Channel even stressed his unworldy disinterestedness. “He has,” the Edinburgh Review told its readers in 1829, “consecrated himself, his life, and labours, to philosophy, and philosophy alone; nor has he approached the sanctuary with unwashed hands.”[^67]

### A Moi Given Whole and A Priori

As a member of the immediately post-Revolutionary generation, Cousin perceived the legacy of the Revolution as intensely problematic. In his view, the events of 1789 had overthrown tradition as the guide to social and political life and installed in its place nothing more substantial than a gamut of competing theories, leaving France threatened with perennial instability. Cousin was not inclined to join in the lament that depicted the Revolution and its sequelae as “the fault of Voltaire, the fault of Rousseau.” Rather, amplifying a theme that we have already seen in Maine de Biran’s journal, he preferred to assign the blame to Condillac and the sensationalist psychology more generally. As Cousin analyzed the situation, the unchallenged ascendancy of sensationalism had the disastrous effect of eroding the moral verities that must, if society is to remain stable, serve as a brake on human impulse. As he saw it, sensationalism built up a self (or more accurately, a simulacrum of a self) through the accumulation of atomistic sensations, each of which had originated as a reaction to a material stimulus and was thus essentially passive. Such a psychology could not ground a durable, unified self—one that, animated by an active spiritual principle, would bear moral responsibility both as a duty in this life and because the specter of eternal punishment deterred it from straying. The fragmented sensationalist self had instead opened the door to the exaggerated, reckless idealism and the antisocial violence that had characterized the Revolutionary decade. In the Cousinian scheme of things, as in its less militant Biranian counterpart, repairing the self by philosophical means was therefore the linchpin in the project of the post-Revolutionary stabilization of France.

That remedial project is sketched in broad strokes on the first page of the bound notebook of an obscure student who attended Cousin’s Sorbonne never-published course of mid-December 1819 to mid-March 1820. The page contains a single paragraph, ascribed to “Cousin,” but since the student begins his verbatim record of the actual lecture series only several pages later, the precise provenance of the paragraph in question is unclear. Perhaps the student copied it from the notes he had garnered at another of Cousin’s courses. Almost certainly he intended it as the introduction to the notebook as a whole—and aptly so, for it masterfully captures the core of Cousin’s philosophical message. To “Cousin” is attributed the following:

> In my view, the man of character is a man who makes himself, a man who has a will, who is his own source of life. The man of temperament is one who acts according to his passivity. Now persistent passivity does not constitute character. That is how we can distinguish the men of antiquity from modern men. [The ancients] remained hidden for a long time, shaping themselves as they wished to be, and if they consequently appeared calm and tranquil amidst turmoil, that is because character is unity! The moderns are filled with anxiety because they have not made for themselves a self (moi) that persists. They are not themselves, they are [dispersed] in everything that surrounds them.[^68]

All the basic Cousinian elements are present: the repeated jibes against sensationalism, here encoded under the words “passivity” and “modern”; the mockery of pedagogical regimens based upon it (for example, the Idéologue curriculum of the central schools), which so emphasized acute observation of the external world that, in Cousin’s view, the student’s personal being was vitiated, reduced to bits and pieces wantonly strewn throughout the environment; the weakness and anxiety associated with such psychological fragmentation; the high praise reserved for the unified moi.

Almost immediately upon assuming a public role, Cousin began to hammer out his message about the grandeur of the human moi and the inability of a sensationalist philosophy to provide a foundation for that indispensable entity. His fixation on the moi surfaced in December 1815, when he began his stint as Royer-Collard’s substitute in the history of modern philosophy at the Sorbonne. His inaugural lecture had announced a course on the perception of external phenomena. However, after several classes on the declared topic, Cousin suddenly—and, no doubt, all the more memorably—reversed direction and decided to devote the entire year to the philosophical issue he regarded as “first both chronologically and in importance, that of the moi and of personal existence.”[^69] To be sure, Royer-Collard’s teaching, which Cousin would later characterize in gendered language as a “manly dialectic” (mâle dialectique),[^70] had already gone some small distance in the direction of rescuing the self from its abject (and politically perilous) condition of sensationalist fragmentation. Relying on the Scottish common sense school of philosophy as an antidote to sensationalism, Royer-Collard had insisted on the distinction between sensation and perception. This seemingly technical point, in fact, advanced the meaning-laden argument that a passive capacity for sensory reception and an active capacity for judgment were equally constitutive of the human mind.[^71] But Cousin would take this tendency much further than his mentor and eventually create a philosophical system entirely centered on an active moi.

With this goal already in view, Cousin’s maiden course treated the history of philosophy exclusively through the lens of the vicissitudes of the self. Thus when Cousin turned to Condillac, he warned his audience not to “expect any general consideration” of that philosopher or of the eighteenth century. “I will limit myself . . . to all the passages about the moi that can be found in [Condillac’s] writings.” His criticism was harsh. Condillac, he charged, “departs from a radically defective hypothesis” and subsequently “gets lost in nihilism.” He is able to make the self dependent on something as flimsy and feeble as memory only by confusing it with another concept, that of the self-identical self. After all, Cousin pointed out, “memory returns to that which was; if there is nothing prior, it is mute. It can say ‘still me’ only after an initial act of intelligence mingled with consciousness has said ‘me.’” Cousin thus corrected Condillac by insisting, much as Maine de Biran had, that the moi exists a priori, that it is already there at the first sensation and the first glimmerings of consciousness. Only its absolute priority, its foundational nature, enables a more highly elaborated entity, the self-identical moi that endures through space and time, to come into existence at the moment of the second sensation.[^72]

The moi is a substance, Cousin furthermore insisted, controverting Condillac; but, pace Spinoza, it is not a substance that can be defined axiomatically. “Metaphysics,” Cousin stated, “is not a part of mathematics. It is instead a science of observation, like physics or the natural sciences.” Hence, Cousin’s eclecticism would not be a simple reprise of the seventeenth-century systems; it would return to metaphysics while inflecting it with the modality of observation emphasized by the eighteenth-century empiricists. Cousin’s insistence on self-as-substance was also marshaled against Condillac’s definition of the self as a collection of sensations, a collection that, Cousin said, paraphrasing Condillac, was located in an indeterminate “somewhere” and was nothing but a “logical and grammatical subject,” a “sign” affixed to an assemblage of floating qualities “imagined” as a subject. By contrast, Cousin’s substantial self was no nebulous, jerry-built somewhere; as “common sense and the entire human race” attested, it was a “real subject.”[^73]

The core of Cousin’s observationally based metaphysics, of that “so sought after alliance of metaphysical and physical science,” was what he called the “psychological method.” Descriptions of that method lard his teaching like incantations. Here is a description from 1826:

> The psychological method consists in isolating oneself from any other world but that of consciousness in order to establish and orient oneself there, where everything is real but where the reality is exceedingly diverse and delicate. The talent for the psychological consists in voluntarily inserting oneself into this entirely interior world, in giving oneself to oneself as spectacle, and in reproducing freely and distinctly all the phenomena that, in the circumstances of ordinary life, are thrown up only in an accidental and confused manner.

The basic rule was totality: undertaken without bias, observation “must be complete, must exhaust its object, and can be allowed to stop only when there are no phenomena left to observe.” No wonder, then, that there were “many different levels of depth in the psychological method,” as years of practice had taught Cousin.[^74]

Nonetheless, the method had led to at least one discovery of capital importance. In direct refutation of sensationalist doctrine, it had revealed that sensation and its derivatives constituted only one of the categories of the so-called real contents of consciousness. (Engaging in the same mental exercise some seventy-five years earlier, Condillac had, not surprisingly, reported exactly the opposite finding!)[^75] Distinct from and “impossible to confound with” sensation, but equally incontestably real, were two additional components: volition and reason.[^76] The three components operated as a seamless ensemble, but they could be teased apart by means of analysis. They were, Cousin noted in a phrase heavy-handed in its neologizing as well as in its religious reference, “a triplicity which resolves itself into a unity and a unity which develops into a triplicity.”[^77] Cousin considered this classification of the elements of consciousness as one of his signal contributions. “It has really caught on,” he observed with evident pleasure in 1833, “for I see it reproduced in practically every work of psychology that has recently appeared.”[^78]

The psychological method was for Cousin the key to the philosophical enterprise not only because its supposed scientific rigor as an observational practice lent it credibility in an early nineteenth-century intellectual environment. The method also extended well beyond itself, functioning (in another of his favorite phrases) as the “vestibule” to ontology and metaphysics.[^79] As Cousin said when urging Hegel to read the 1826 preface to his Fragmens philosophiques, that “little writing,” which encapsulated his entire system, could be boiled down to: “1, the method; 2, its application to consciousness or psychology; 3, the transition from psychology to ontology. . . .”[^80] To fail to make the transition was a serious defect in a philosopher. Cousin believed that his student Jouffroy, for example, had compromised his genius by shrinking from high-wire speculation. “For fear of losing his way . . . in higher metaphysics . . ., Monsieur Jouffroy enjoyed remaining on the firm terrain of psychology, in those luminous and serene regions where observation is always effective. . . .”[^81]

According to Cousin, any fledgling philosopher who began by scrutinizing his own consciousness would soon learn that its so-called triplicity provided a map of the very structure of the universe. “Ontology is given to us in its entirety at the same time as psychology.” The three internal elements of consciousness had their external counterparts, voluntary activity translating into mankind, sensibility into nature, and reason into God.[^82] Delving deeply inside himself, then, the student of Cousinian philosophy would eventually be propelled outward and upward, arriving at an intimate conviction of certain fixed, immutable principles. According to Cousin, “We can consider as a guaranteed conquest of the experimental method and of true psychological analysis the establishment of principles that, given to us by the most certain of all experiences, that of consciousness, nonetheless have a reach beyond experience and open up to us regions inaccessible to empiricism.”[^83] These precious super-empirical principles concerned “the true, the beautiful, and the good,” to cite the anodyne keywords of Cousin’s 1818 lectures, much later transformed into his abundantly reprinted textbook of the same title.[^84]

But how was the moi related to the three distinct elements of consciousness? Although Cousin did not pose the question so baldly in his earliest teachings,[^85] by the mid-1820s he made it clear that volition was the stuff of selfhood. “The will alone is the person or the moi,” he announced in 1826, only to reiterate a few sentences later, “Our personality is the will and nothing more.” In contrast to those “movements that external agents determine in us, despite ourselves, we have the power to initiate a different kind of movement,” one that “in the eyes of consciousness, assumes a new character.” We “impute [such a movement] to ourselves,” consider ourselves as its cause; indeed it serves for us as the very origin of the concept of cause. Voluntary activity is that element of consciousness that we perceive as our own; it belongs to us. It exists in a “foreign world, amidst two orders of phenomena [the sensible and the rational] that do not belong to us, that we can only perceive on the condition of separating them from ourselves.”[^86]

The motif of belonging and not belonging was one that Cousin mined extensively. In the Fichtean language that he sometimes favored, the data about the external world that came in through our sense organs comprised the non-moi. And though not technically relegated to the non-moi (whose very name seems to connote a pariah status), reason was in Cousin’s scheme also utterly foreign to the moi. This was the central claim of his celebrated concept of “impersonal reason.”[^87] As he instructed the students in his 1828 course, “Your intelligence is not free. . . . You do not constitute your reason, and it does not belong to you.” There was nothing “less individual” or “less personal” than reason. If the products of reason were merely personal, imposing them on others “would be an exaggerated form of despotism.” Instead, the “universal and absolute nature” of reason obliged everyone to bend to its dictates. We are within our rights when “we declare totally crazy (en délire) those who do not accept the truths of arithmetic or the difference between beauty and ugliness, justice and injustice.”[^88] In other words, Cousin deployed the claim that reason does not “belong to us” (but rather to God) as a powerful argument in favor of common standards and values and against the kind of social and political contestation that bred instability and revolution.

Conversely, the claim that voluntary activity, or the moi, did indeed “belong to us” provided Cousin with an equally powerful argument in favor of private property. It is worth noting that both Locke and Cousin provided a philosophical blueprint of the self with reference to its legal implications. Locke’s forensic reference was, as discussed in Chapter 3, the criminal law. He emphasized the pragmatic need to postulate a continuous self-identical self to ensure the just punishment of wrongdoers. Cousin’s forensic reference was, on the other hand, the civil law. He stressed the inextricable intertwinement of the theory of the self with the right to private property. In this regard, he may have been influenced by his informal mentor Maine de Biran, who pondered the matter in his journal intime in 1817. Responding to a philosophical manuscript of an old friend and colleague who grounded property in the person, which he equated with the human organisation—that is, its complex physiological structure—and its capacity for sensation, Maine de Biran agreed with the basic line of reasoning but faulted the definition of the person that the author was employing. “You have to know what you mean by the moi.” To function as guarantor in such an argument, the moi could not originate in a “living, organized, sensing composite” (my emphasis) but only in a so-called “simple” entity, one not composed of parts, “that acts or creates effort while having at its disposal certain faculties lodged in the same whole.”[^89] This motif must have stayed with Maine de Biran because, some months later, he nearly crowed in exultation upon reaching his family estate at Grateloup in the Périgord:

> I arrive home. There I enjoy a complete sense of property. The changes that took place in my absence pique my curiosity and call me fully to the outside world [au dehors, a term that Maine de Biran uses as the opposite of his states of meditative interiority]. I examine each object with an attention full of attraction. Everything interests me: the least shrub, the plant that escapes other eyes elicits my glance. It is mine; it is a part of myself.[^90]

Whether or not inspired by Maine de Biran, Cousin sketched out the linkage between the moi and private property in detail in his 1818–19 Sorbonne lectures on the history of moral philosophy. He began by declaring that the “first and most intimate development of the free moi is thought; all thought, considered within the bounds of the individual sphere, is sacred.” Its quality of inviolability derived from the transfer to it of an essential quality of the self—that it belongs to us. Thus, in keeping with the principle that “our original property is ourselves, our moi,” Cousin asserts that the “first act of free, personal thought is the first act of property.” This rhetorical move then enabled him to make sweeping assertions about property in general. Property was not, he assured his student audience, based upon mere convention; after all, conventions could be annulled by the parties who had agreed to them. Rather it was founded on a “superior principle—that of the sanctity of liberty.” Property consisted in the “free imposition of the personality,” that is, of volitional activity, “on things.” Once acquired, those things “participate in some manner in my personality.” They obtain rights by this relationship or, what is the same thing, “I have rights in them,” so that “by augmenting [my] property, [I] extend the circle of [my] rights.” The natural right to property thus rested on the principle of human liberty, and that natural right, in turn, became institutionalized as a right protected by civil law.[^91]

In sum, property was for Cousin not only rooted in and protected by the homologous structures of the human psyche and the universe but was also an arena of distinctly human self-development. Nowhere, perhaps, than in its gloss on property does eclectic philosophy and its conception of the moi appear more clearly as a justification for the bourgeois order, in both the Marxian and the ordinary senses of that term. The urgency of the eclectic need to shore up property can be seen by comparing Cousin’s argument with those of his predecessors, Locke and Destutt de Tracy.

In his late seventeenth-century Second Treatise on Government, Locke also derived the right of private property from the contention that “every Man has a Property in his own Person.” However, his understanding of the person in this context was a corporeal rather than a spiritual or psychological one (“The Labour of his Body, and the Work of his Hands, we may say, are property”), and he cast his whole discussion in terms of man’s natural right to physical self-preservation. Although an unambiguous advocate of private property, Locke did not attempt to depict ownership as a spiritual desideratum, nor did he return to the issue in his Essay Concerning Human Understanding in order to treat it from a psychological angle.[^92]

In an argument quite similar to and nearly contemporaneous with Cousin’s, Destutt de Tracy did derive private property from human psychology and, in particular, from the will. But that will was itself a rather more contingent affair than it was in the eclectic system, being itself a consequence of the prior capacity for sensation. Tracy insisted that the capacity for sensation was originary. It was “that beyond which we cannot go,” and as such it was “the same thing as us,” the “existence of the moi and the sensitivity of the moi” being simply identical. Hence, to regard “one’s will as the equivalent of oneself is [erroneously] to take the part for the whole.” Tracy even entertained the possibility that a being endowed with sensitivity but lacking a will could have individuality or personality; but such a being, he opined, could never come up with the idea of property. On the other hand, once the sensory capacity had generated a will, the idea of property would be born “necessarily and inevitably in all its plenitude.”[^93] In other words, Idéologues like Destutt de Tracy were entirely committed to the idea of private property, but they thought that idea sufficiently hardy that it did not need the fortress-like protection of an a priori moi nor of a tripartite division of consciousness replicated in the structure of the universe as a whole. Cousin had, obviously, more stringent requirements for order, which embraced the self and its property together.

### Cousinian Introspection as a Technology of the Self

What Cousin called the psychological method undergirded more than just a philosophical system. From the perspective of the person employing it, it was a learned skill that helped to fashion a particular kind of self. As such, it qualified as a “technology of the self” in Michel Foucault’s sense—one of those “procedures, which have doubtless existed in all civilizations, that are proposed or prescribed to individuals in order to fix, maintain, or transform their identities with particular ends in view” and that operate by means of either “a mastery of the self by the self or a knowledge of the self by the self.”[^94] Cousin’s version of introspection provided adepts with both a practical mode of access to the inner life and a specialized language with which to talk about it. It shaped the self in part through the deceptively simple gesture of naming it, of affixing the label moi to a certain kind of mental content.

Cousin hammered home the central importance of introspection—or, as it was called in nineteenth-century France, interior observation[^95]—through his representation of his personal itinerary as a philosopher. As he described his formative years in 1826 (when he had attained the ripe age of thirty-four and could apparently afford to muse on his beginnings), the driving force behind his philosophical vocation had been twofold: on the one hand, his realization of the destruction wrought by the “analytic spirit” of the eighteenth-century sensualists and hence of the urgent need for reconstruction; on the other hand, his fundamental admiration for the Baconian inductive method that those same sensualists endorsed. His philosophical breakthrough came in 1815 when he decided that the way out of his impasse was to wed Baconian observation to the metaphysics that the sensualists proscribed. Accordingly in that year, he pioneered on himself his “psychological method,” which ever since had “constitute[d] the fundamental unity of my teaching.” What this method owed to Maine de Biran’s méditation psychologique, or even whether Cousin knew of the older philosopher’s habitual introspective practices, we can only speculate. In any case, Cousin’s “historical consciousness”—or perhaps, more accurately, his precocious desire for self-memorialization—spurred him on to reproduce faithfully and “in all their weakness” his very first applications of this unusually fertile method and to publish them under the title Fragmens philosophiques. That book made available three years’ worth of his “obscure and painful labors.” The “psychological details” it recorded, while “arid and lacking in all apparent grandeur,” must nonetheless, he admonished, “never be forgotten since they form the legitimate point of departure for all the future directions that philosophy can and should take.”[^96]

Cousin’s whole system of eclecticism had, in other words, issued from his heroic introspective experience of the years 1815–17. That experience had both founded the discipline of eclectic philosophy and formed the prototype of all subsequent work in it, much as Descartes’ period of systematic doubt while living in solitude in Holland and Freud’s interpretation of his own dreams in fin-de-siècle Vienna had served in a joint foundational-prototypical capacity in the disciplines of Cartesian philosophy and psychoanalysis, respectively. Not surprisingly, then, training in Cousinian philosophy mirrored the master’s development by also featuring introspection. This was already true as early as 1815–20, when, as maître de conférences in philosophy at the Ecole normale, Cousin imposed on his students (so close to him in age that they later became “my friends”) what he called “that austere discipline . . . exempt from all mechanical narrowness.” At its heart was an effort to instill in them “that psychological sense, that art of interior observation without which man remains unknown to man and philosophy is only an assemblage of lifeless concepts. . . .”[^97]

Outsiders likewise regarded Cousinianism as fostering introspection among the student population of the late 1830s. One of Auguste Comte’s harangues against interior observation, and in favor of the “positive” method of studying mental phenomena exclusively by means of cerebral and nervous physiology, mentioned the “deplorable psychological mania that a famous sophist had momentarily succeeded in inspiring in French youth.” His listeners would have readily identified the unnamed “sophist” as Cousin and the “psychological mania” as the enthusiastic belief in the scientific efficacy of introspection; the adverb “momentarily” bespoke Comte’s fond wish that the vogue of Cousinianism might quickly pass.[^98] Stendhal also saw introspection as the hallmark of the Cousinian teaching. To be sure, his own adherence to Idéologie committed him to introspection, but he satirized Cousin’s particular variety of it mercilessly:

> Monsieur Cousin claims to have found all this out by means of what he calls a “meditative interrogation of consciousness.” That is the whole secret of the new school of philosophy. If these gentlemen did not hide behind the obscurity of their style, everyone would see the inanity of their thought. While they interrogate their consciousnesses, in which they read so many fine things, they shut their eyes to the realities established by Locke and Condillac and replace facts and experiences with ideal speculations.[^99]

What guidelines did Cousin offer the student embarking on the momentous journey of interior observation? The descriptions of the introspective method scattered through the master’s writings hardly provide step-by-step instructions. Stendhal was not far from the mark when he acerbically summed them up as “Close your eyes and search your consciousness.”[^100] In fact, the very word “consciousness,” a mainstay in the Cousinian vocabulary, may help to explain why the maître did not feel called upon to provide a lavish description of the procedure. “Consciousness,” which seems to have entered the English language when Locke invoked it in the Essay on Human Understanding as one of the sources of personal identity, initially had no French equivalent. “We have in my view only the words sentiment and conviction which correspond in some manner to [Locke’s] idea,” complained Pierre Coste, the French translator of Locke’s great work, and he consequently adopted the awkward neologism con-science, stipulating that it be both hyphenated and italicized to accentuate its Latin roots.[^101] Soon standardized as the nonhyphenated and nonitalicized conscience, the term was, in Cousin’s usage, basically synonymous with the sens intime of the eighteenth-century Catholic Cartesian apologists. “See ‘Consciousness’ (Conscience),” the Cousinian philosophical dictionary tells the reader who attempts to look up sens intime.[^102] Both terms denoted the sheer obviousness, or self-evidence, of our knowledge of the self; our immediate, unshakable, a priori conviction about its existence, unity, and identity. Insofar as the act of introspection was, simply, attending to consciousness, it was hard to see how it could be analyzed, elaborated upon, or expressed as a temporal sequence.

Nonetheless, Cousin’s occasional descriptions of introspection do convey some sense of the relevant procedure, as he understood it. In addition to the description, cited in the previous section, that figured in Cousin’s 1826 account of the strenuous early years of his own philosophic career, there are revealing characterizations in his Sorbonne lectures of 1828:

> What is psychological analysis? It is the slow, patient, and meticulous observation, with the aid of consciousness, of phenomena hidden in the depths of human nature. These phenomena are complicated, fleeting, obscure, rendered almost indiscernible (insaissisable) by their very closeness. The consciousness which applies itself to them is an instrument of extreme delicacy: it is a microscope applied to things infinitely small.[^103]

> There is, Gentlemen, a psychological art, for reflection is, so to speak, against nature, and this art is not learned in a day. One does not fold back upon oneself easily without long practice, sustained habit, and a laborious apprenticeship.[^104]

Two motifs stand out in these accounts. First, introspection is an ascetic, almost monastic discipline tinged with heroism: it requires self-sacrifice and a long and painful tutelage, it goes against the grain, and it removes the practitioner from the reassuring world of ordinary social intercourse. Second, in epistemological terms, introspection is decidedly hybrid. At times Cousin stresses its scientificity, as when he metaphorically identifies it with a microscope or, in a passage that I have not quoted here, declares that psychology and physics are on a par as empirical sciences.[^105] At other times, however, he designates introspection as an art and intimates that plying it to more than superficial effect requires a touch of genius. In thus suggesting that introspection is a combined art-and-science, Cousin clearly wants to have his cake and eat it too. A zealous opponent of the reduction of mental phenomena to biological ones, he nonetheless wants his psychology to possess all the authority that the term “science” conferred in the early nineteenth century. At the same time he appeals to the Romantic sensibilities of his audience by endowing his key procedure of interior observation with the ethos of an art capable of seizing the extremely delicate and elusive nature of consciousness as an object. In its Romantic guise, successful introspection is a feat of almost high-wire virtousity.

Cousin gives us enough information to infer such a general description of introspection but, beyond that, he has little to say about what introspection discovers. He was apparently uninterested in the texture of subjectivity, in capturing nuances of emotion or in charting the ebbs, flows, and clashes of currents of thought and feeling. Interiority was not for him a preferred locus of experience or place of refuge, although he liked to depict himself to his students as if it were. (At the opening lecture of his 1828 course, for example, he made much of the inwardness that he had cultivated during his years of banishment from teaching and worried aloud that, having become “accustomed to those forms of thought that serve well to explain ourselves to ourselves,” he might have lost the knack of communicating to a large audience.)[^106] Instead, interiority attracted him as a polemical resource: he sought to marshal the evidence of introspection to establish once and for all that the human subject was not passive and hence dangerously exempt from moral responsibility but active, and that a host of moral and political consequences flowed inexorably from that truth.

His polemical investment in mental activity colored his evaluations of his predecessors. Thus Maine de Biran earned the accolade of the most important of Cousin’s French mentors because of the heed he paid to the phenomena of the will. “That admirable observer taught me to tease out in all our knowledge, and even in the simple events of consciousness, the role of voluntary activity, of that activity in which our personality bursts forth.”[^107] On the other hand, Cousin demoted Kant, finding him guilty of a “psychological error that put him en route to the abyss.” By failing to bestow on “voluntary and free activity” the same care and analytic scrutiny that he bestowed on reason, Kant never recognized the special connection between will and personality.[^108]

Given the primarily polemical purpose of Cousinian introspection, it is hardly surprising that its fruits were minimalist and monochromatic rather than variegated, richly textured, and elaborately patterned. Cousin never explicitly defined the concept of mental activity that functioned as his psychological holy grail. He did imply (perhaps following Maine de Biran) that it was a kind of switch point at the border between an individual’s spirituality and materiality, the mental impetus within that individual whose “mysterious” property was to cause that individual’s muscles to move.[^109] Hence a self equated with volition or activity would probably be introspectively experienced by its possessor as a surge of absolutely unified and unmarked assertion, as an element of consciousness essentially lacking in specific content.

The quest for mental activity thus helps to explain why the Cousinian movement, for all its reliance and insistence on introspection, did not produce an introspective literature, even during the era in which the journal intime emerged as a genre and then flourished exuberantly.[^110] Cousin and his followers wrote profusely, but they did not ordinarily cultivate the modalities of the diary, the confession, or even the autobiographical reminiscence. Cousin may have learned many things from Maine de Biran, but he evidently had no inclination to adopt his mentor’s practice of keeping a daily journal replete with descriptions of his inner mental states and bouts of emotional malaise. Nor did he place a high value on Biran’s own journal, or rather on what was characteristic of it as an instance of the genre: presented with it in 1843 (when Biran’s son sent piles of his deceased father’s papers to Paris), he opened only one of the four notebooks and, totally incurious about Biran’s protracted dialogue with himself, certified its worth by observing that it contained “rather long philosophical passages.”[^111] The bits of autobiography that Cousin wove into the prefaces of his Fragmens philosophiques are much stiffer, less revelatory, more exclusively confined to professional career and public face than even what Descartes saw fit to share with his readers in the Discourse on Method.

In their pursuit of their own brand of reflexivity, some Cousinians went further than merely bypassing the soul-searching variety. Ernest Bersot actively deplored what he called the “demon of interior analysis,” that incessant “work on [one]self” that had, in his view, been Rousseau’s undoing. Instead of depicting it neutrally as a more intense form of the method of interior observation on which psychological science relied, he cast it as something radically different, indeed as the enemy of that science. In Bersot’s view, such interior analysis made one prey to illusion; it roused “the sleeping chaos of feelings and thoughts” always lurking in the “depths of the soul” and caused it to assume invasive proportions. Those who engaged in this dangerously excessive self-observation would never know “true science.”[^112]

Among Cousin’s students, I have come across a single exception to this general rule of avoidance of soul-searching introspection. Between the years 1836 and 1849 Antoine Charma kept what he playfully called a nocturnal—that is, a journal in reverse, a record of his mental activities at night—later using it as the raw material for a scholarly work on sleep. Charma believed, in orthodox Cousinian fashion, that sleep did not suspend the will, that “one possesses oneself while dreaming” and that, as “master of [him]self,” the dreaming subject continues to deliberate. Although he thus adamantly refused to disown the self that appeared in his dreams, he nonetheless frankly recounted dreams in which his murderous rage toward an enemy and or his anxieties about saving a drowning child, and subsequent humiliation when the supposed child turned out to be an old rooster, were on full view.[^113] But, as will be discussed in the next chapter, Charma was hardly the ideal type of the Cousinian and broke with the maître for reasons both of doctrine and of temperament.

In sum, although Cousin was, in technical philosophical terms, a zealous champion of introspection, and although in everyday terms, he placed high cultural value on a person’s ability to look inward, he was not introspective in the way that we ordinarily use that term today. He seems to have utterly lacked the propensity to rummage around in his psyche or to find layers of hidden complexity in his motives and feelings. An agitated letter to the maître by one of his students makes this point vividly. Having reported a painful inner conflict between personal desire and professional duty, Etienne Vacherot was devastated when Cousin’s advice to him acknowledged only the claims of duty. He described himself as “driven to despair” by the thought that “it would be necessary [for Cousin] to be inside myself (être en moi-même) to understand my position.”[^114] Vacherot’s choice of language was telling. By admitting, as a consummate Cousinian, that he could not expect his mentor to share or even appreciate his inner state, that such “in-dwelling” exceeded the bounds of Cousin’s possibilities, he inadvertently attests to the oddly abstract nature of Cousinian-style introspection. Within the total system of eclecticism, introspection served an intellectual function as a bridge to ontology and a social function as a token of cultivation. It dispensed with that attentiveness to the nuances of one’s own thoughts and feelings that typically endowed an introspective individual—in the ordinary meaning of that term—with a capacity for empathy.

### A Discourse of Human Difference: The Selved and the Unselved

The chief discovery that Cousin made by means of introspection was that the human personality could be identified with activity or will. However, in Cousin’s canon, introspection was associated with another, equally momentous breakthrough: it revealed the axis on which the fundamental difference between human beings could be plotted. The so-called triplicity of consciousness, or the operational fusion of the three analytically distinct elements of sensibility, rationality, and will, served for some people, but not for others, as a permanent barrier to teasing out the moi and forcefully appropriating it for—and as—themselves. In other words, everyone had a moi in principle. But to have one in practice required a certain mental agility, which Cousin called the capacity for reflection. Volition may have been the content of selfhood, but without reflection that content remained largely inaccessible to its owner. At his pivotal 1828 course, Cousin expounded this theme to the students packing the hall:

> The identity of consciousness constitutes the identity of human knowledge. It is on this common base that time sketches all the differences that distinguish one man from another. The three terms of consciousness form a primitive synthesis, in which they exist in a more or less confused state. Often a man stops at that point—that is, in fact, the case with the majority of men. Sometimes a man goes further and succeeds in exiting: he adds analysis to the primitive synthesis, develops it by reflection, disentangles the complex phenomenon by submitting it to a light which, spreading successively over each of the three terms of consciousness, illuminates them reciprocally. What happens then? The man knows better what he knew already. All the possible differences between one man and another reside there.[^115]

This is a slippery passage, oscillating as it does between a democratic insistence on our common humanity, save for some variations that might be merely cosmetic, and an elitist insistence on the significant intellectual superiority of a minority of the population who are able to hone the primeval mental stuff with which we are all endowed. During subsequent decades, Cousin opted for both of those readings, stressing one or the other according to the circumstances. But just as the passage quoted lavishes more attention on the mechanism of human differentiation and its hierarchical implications, so, too, did Cousin tend to favor the elitist interpretation of his text. And even at those moments when the democratic interpretation appealed to him, he managed to give it an inegalitarian twist.

The two categories of human difference that preoccupied Cousin were those, spawned by the process of industrialization, that preoccupied most early nineteenth-century Western Europeans: gender and class. By contrast, race seems to have been largely outside his ken. Despite his fascination with Asian and, in particular, Indian philosophy, he evinced no inclination to construct a racial hierarchy of human intellectual abilities.[^116] Similarly, his close philosophical collaborator Jouffroy could, while a member of the Chamber of Deputies in 1840, write a detailed account of the contemporary situation in Algeria, including the diversity and mutual enmity of its three component “races”—Kabyles, Moors, and Arabs—and use the term “race” in a distinctly neutral register, synonymous with “peoples” and “populations” and lacking any pejorative connotation, biological content, or even special salience as a marker of human difference.[^117] As for the otherness represented by the Jews, be it religious or in some manner racial, it seems to have struck Cousin as decidedly unproblematic. He was, if anything, philosemitic and was attacked on those grounds by the right-wing press.[^118]

How then, from the vantage point of his psychological theory, did Cousin construe the inherent differences that struck him as significant, those between males and females, between the bourgeoisie and the popular classes?

Cousin’s ruminations on the intellectual capacities of women and the consequent possibility of female selfhood were a basically private affair, though one prompted by his very public verbalization of the most banal prejudices.[^119] During a lecture on the laws governing history that he gave as part of his 1828 course, Cousin commended his own brand of philosophy, often referred to as rational spiritualism, by depicting it as the golden mean between the materialist “philosophy of sensation” and a “sentimental and cowardly spiritualism, good for children and for women [but] fatal to science.” In the very next lecture of the series, he again belittled that defective compound being, women-and-children: “There [i.e., in the domain of metaphysics], all is obscure for the senses and the imagination, for children and for women; but there, too, all is light for reflection, for he who demands of himself a manly (viril) accounting of his own thought.”[^120] The vast majority of Cousin’s auditors and readers probably failed to notice these offhand comments. So unquestioned in this era were the gender stereotypes they expressed that Stendhal had even bidden his sister to conduct her reading of Condillac and Destutt de Tracy in secret because a “woman cuts the legs from under herself if she is seen studying.”[^121] But the aspersions cast by Cousin provoked an autodidact bourgeois lady in her mid-thirties to write to the Sorbonne philosopher for the first time.

Already his self-described “fervent disciple,” Caroline Angebert had been following his 1828 course from her home in Dunkerque (her husband was a navy officer), apparently by reading the individually published installments. She now took him to task for a denigration of the female intellect (“the disdain that you express for my sex in assimilating it to childhood!”). Such a position was, she contended, not merely insulting to women but, worse still, logically inconsistent with the rest of his system. Hadn’t Cousin insisted, after all, on the common “intellectual patrimony of humanity”? Hadn’t he stated that a man’s mind was “composed of the same elements” as that of his wife, mother, and sister? Hadn’t he maintained that a principle of intelligence existed in each of us but required development, thus implying that the present intellectual inequality between the sexes resulted from developmental vicissitude rather than inborn constraint?[^122]

Angebert argued with astonishing acuity. Although self-taught, she had clearly grasped the structure of Cousin’s reasoning and had intuitively zeroed in on one of his most fundamental contradictions. Let me put this contradiction in language not available to Angebert. In his quest for a unified and morally responsible moi, Cousin had purposely severed in his psychology the biological roots that he found so distasteful in sensationalism. He thereby denied himself a mode of argument that would have led seamlessly to the positing of an explicitly female—and inferior—mental apparatus. Out of his reach were those visceral “commotions” and those nervous vibrations accompanying menstruation that, for an Idéologue like Cabanis, interfered with the idea-generating mechanism in the adult female and inevitably beclouded female ideas.[^123] The biologistic turn of Western thought at the beginning of the nineteenth century furnished powerful tools for the construction of gender inequality. But, utterly committed to mind/body dualism and to the radical disembodiment of intellect, Cousin could not avail himself of those tools. Angebert was correct: the most basic logic of his system failed to support Cousin’s disparagement of women. While her arguments were more explicitly feminist, she was plowing the same furrow as the seventeenth-century cartésiennes who noted the advantages of Descartes’ dualism for validating female intellectual pursuits; indeed, in initiating a correspondence with Cousin, she may have had in the back of her mind the famous epistolary relationship between Descartes and Elisabeth of Bohemia.[^124]

Angebert and Cousin exchanged about a dozen letters between 1828 and 1832, and their entanglement was as fascinating from a personal as from an intellectual viewpoint. Although animosity always hovered in the wings, each was, for a time at least, highly motivated to maintain a cordial relationship: Angebert because she was awed by Cousin’s fame and desperately wanted a supervisor for her philosophy reading; Cousin because he was loath to let go a female disciple at once so intellectually gifted and so obvious infatuated with him. The unlikely pair thus found a modus vivendi through a slightly disingenuous compromise. Begging Angebert not to “confuse a manner of speaking with the articulation of a principle,” Cousin reaffirmed the fundamental universalism of his psychology.[^125] For her part Angebert conceded that her characterization of his views of the female sex had been “a little exaggerated,” that “I sometimes let myself be swept away by my imagination,” that despite her nearly constant preoccupation with “the destiny of women, their education, their social position,” he had assuaged her doubts “in a satisfactory manner.”[^126]

I will consider in Chapter 5 the impact of this correspondence on Angebert. As for its influence on Cousin, it seems to have left intact the basically patronizing attitude toward women and the firm identification of intellect with masculinity revealed in his 1828 lectures. As minister of public instruction in 1840, for example, he sent out a circular on the unjustified neglect of logic in the philosophy curriculum that was almost comic in its use of gendered language:

> The syllogistic art is at the very least a powerful form of fencing that gives precision and rigor to the mind. It was in that virile school that our fathers were formed; it can only be to the advantage of today’s youth that we detain them there a while.[^127]

What Cousin did take away from his encounter with Angebert was a tactical nicety. He learned that the internal consistency of his system required that, when speaking of women, he grant them the same intellectual potential as men. This lesson led him not to embrace gender equality as a principle but rather to shift his argument for gender inequality to new ground: the separation of the public and private spheres as a social norm.

It is that subtly inflected argument that he presents in the 1844 article on Pascal’s sister Jacqueline that he addressed to a general readership. True to his first, conciliatory letter to Angebert, he noted that both sexes have the same God-given intellectual faculties and the same divinely ordained obligation to cultivate them. However, the use to which intellect might legitimately be put differed radically for men and women. By definition, men were public personages and women domestic creatures. A woman should thus take no pride or pleasure in exercising her mind but should do so only for the sake of the man in her life. She should acquire the knowledge that “permits her to enter into spiritual rapport [with her partner], to understand his work. . . . to feel his sufferings in order to soothe them.” Cousin summed up his views in a laconic dictum: “I make a sharp distinction between the woman of wit and learning (femme d’esprit) and the woman author. I infinitely honor the one, and I have little taste for the other.”[^128] Women could, in other words, tastefully deploy intellect in the context of the married couple, where they played an ancillary, collaborative and, above all, inconspicuous role. But they could not attract attention as the freestanding, self-possessed authors of their own intellectual activity. For a woman to extricate her moi from the viscous, primitive synthesis of the elements of consciousness was, quite simply, an offensive act. No wonder that a student of Cousin making his debut as a professor of Cousinian philosophy in 1839 at the Lyon Faculty, where his lectures were open to the public, thought to tell the maître that “my audience differs from that of my colleagues in that there are no ladies. I chased them all away by the second lesson.”[^129]

As far as I know, Cousin never encountered a working-class equivalent of Caroline Angebert, though later, under the Second Republic, one of his own students would defiantly deconstruct the eclectic philosophy and seek to expose its intrinsically democratic bent (see Chapter 5). For lack of such an interlocutor, Cousin’s position on the lower orders’ capacity for selfhood seems to have remained constant. Like his pre-Angebert position on women, it hinged on the ability of the group in question to engage in reflection. However, with respect to the lower orders more than with respect to women, Cousin stressed the distinction between reflection and its binary opposite, something that he labeled “spontaneity.” “This theory of spontaneity and reflection,” he observed late in his career, “that in our eyes is the key that unlocks so many difficulties, recurs incessantly in our works.”[^130] The young Ernest Renan, reading and annotating in the mid 1840s an edition of Cousin’s celebrated 1818 lectures on the true, the beautiful, and the good, also noted the repeated use of the reflection-spontaneity distinction but found the distinction murky and unhelpful: “mysterious” was his pejorative adjective.[^131] Renan was correct. Cousin said little about the precise nature of the two mental processes except that spontaneity preceded reflection developmentally (presumably in both the biography of the individual and in the history of the human species) and that, as a form of “primitive” knowledge, spontaneity was “indistinct [and] obscure.”[^132] He apparently preferred to dwell on their sociology, broadly construed.

In Cousin’s view, the difference between the two mental processes translated directly into the different social groups that characteristically employed them. As he asserted in 1826:

> There is in reflection nothing that is not in the [mental] operation that precedes it, spontaneity. Reflection is, to be sure, a degree of intelligence rarer and higher than spontaneity, but it is bound by the condition that it summarize spontaneity faithfully and develop it without destroying it. Now, in my opinion, the mass of humanity is spontaneous and not reflective.[^133]

Cousin reiterated the general point two years later in his 1828 course. “I have the deepest respect for good sense, for good sense is nothing but reason itself at its lowest level, in its most popular [i.e., pertaining to le peuple] aspect.”[^134] A quarter century later, Cousin’s sociology of reflection and spontaneity had even gained a rough quantitative aspect. “The child, the people, three-quarters of the human race,” Cousin now confidently estimated, “scarcely go beyond [spontaneous intuition] and rely on it with full, unlimited security.”[^135] These more ubiquitous but less potent forms of reason—spontaneity, good sense—were not, of course, capable of performing the mental gymnastics that could isolate the moi and render it accessible to its possessor. Hence workers were, though Cousin did not say it in so many words, unselved beings. No wonder the young Renan suspected that Cousin’s frequent recourse to the spontaneity-reflection distinction covertly expressed the kind of “haughty and disdainful philosophy at which he aims.”[^136]

At other times, however, the psychological similarity of human beings struck Cousin as more noteworthy than their different, class-based capacities to apprehend the pure dynamism of the moi. One of those times was the immediate aftermath of the bloody June Days of 1848, when a working-class uprising threatened the newly proclaimed Second Republic and was, in turn, brutally crushed by the state.

Such eruptions of sociopolitical violence were exactly what Cousin had always feared for France, and in 1848 he followed his long-standing inclination to trace them to pernicious conceptions of the psyche. Writing the very first of the “little treatises” (petits traités) that the Academy of Moral and Political Sciences had decided to prepare for the working classes at this critical historical juncture, Cousin took up a question that might at first glance seem irrelevant to the crisis at hand: whether the people could be taught philosophy. However, that rubric afforded him the opportunity to specify the native philosophical-cum-psychological beliefs of the people and then to engage in some wishful thinking out loud, a kind of exhortation to the people to assume the traits he had already imputed to them.

Cousin insisted that all human beings had (in the manner of Rousseau’s Savoyard vicar, whose profession of faith from the Emile formed the appendix to the pamphlet) spontaneous, unreflective knowledge of certain metaphysical truths—for example, the existence of God, the mind-body distinction, the existence and immortality of the soul. The content of this so-called popular philosophy was exactly the same as that of the learned philosophy based on the higher mental operation of reflection; the two philosophies differed only in vocabulary and style. Thus psychologically equipped (and Cousin took care to specify that the popular philosophy “has its psychology”), the people, like their social and educational betters, were and knew themselves to be morally accountable beings. Natural opponents of Locke and Condillac, they required no instruction to recognize that “man does not wholly reside in his senses.”[^137]

The accent of this pamphlet was thus apparently democratic. But, placed in its historical context, as well as in the full context of the Cousinian philosophy, it acquired strong hierarchical and disciplinarian overtones. The worker was psychologically constituted so as to give assent to and be hedged round by the same moral restraints as the bourgeois. If he listened to his conscience, he would, for example, know better than to subvert the social order through rebellion. If saddled with moral accountability, however, the worker was still, like the woman, excluded from the buoyantly positive side of the Cousinian doctrine. While he could and should repress wayward impulses and choose correct behavior, he could not reflect on what it meant to choose. He could never experience the thrilling sense of self-affirmation that came from disaggregating consciousness, appropriating the moi, and making direct contact with the self-willed activity coursing within him.

As we shall see in the next chapter, the fundamentally unselved nature of women and workers reverberated in the writings of Cousin’s numerous followers and, even more important, was sealed in the arrangements for the educational institutionalization of Cousinianism. In other words, Cousin and the Cousinian movement deployed the concept of the moi in a startlingly literal politics of selfhood. The moi became a marker, both objective and subjective, that distinguished the central players in early nineteenth-century French society from the peripheral ones, the rulers from the ruled. When asserting in his 1848 pamphlet that workers could never grasp the full-strength metaphysics of the learned, Cousin nonetheless praised their diluted, popular philosophy as “serious,” “grand,” and eminently “male,” a vast improvement over the “effeminate” pablum served up to the people by charitable do-gooders.[^138] But even if the working class had a modest title to mental virility, the exclusion of both workers and women from the corridors of power was, in the Cousinian canon, a given. Or more accurately, it was a given for which Cousin had additionally supplied a psychological rationale.

### The Ambiguous Gift of Bourgeois Selfhood

And what about the lucky few whom the Cousinian canon deemed to be possessors of selves? Cousin’s invidious comments about women and his rudimentary sociology of spontaneity and reflection enable us to infer, by a process of elimination, that the group in question was the male bourgeoisie—defined not in a strict Marxian sense as the owners of the means of capitalist production but in a looser, more colloquial sense as the new, non-noble and frequently state-educated post-Revolutionary social elite. That identification also tallies with Cousin’s strong linkage of the moi and private property; it will, moreover, be repeatedly confirmed in the next chapter through an examination of the state-run schools and state-approved philosophy curricula.

However, even for those so favored, the prospects were not entirely rosy. As we can extrapolate from its structural properties alone, the robust self with which Cousin had endowed these beneficiaries was also peculiarly compromised. Conceptualized as an entirely individual will and a personal principle of activity able to impose itself on inanimate matter, the Cousinian moi nonetheless saw its options for titanic self-making severely limited by the ontology that it generated and to which it was thus inextricably bound. Radically free and capable of profound introspection, its life journey would be one of quasi-comic deflation. For the grandiose moi was destined to be thoroughly unoriginal, to rediscover and take as its guide the banal verities about “the true, the beautiful, and the good” to which Cousin’s ubiquitous textbook would so famously lend his name. In short, the Cousinian combination of “personal will” and “impersonal reason” flattered the possessor of the moi that he enjoyed a thrilling degree of individuality and efficacy yet at the same time guaranteed that he would not rock the boat.

These conflicting poles of Cousinian selfhood seem so profoundly bourgeois as even to constitute a definition of the bourgeois mentality. They mesh perfectly, in fact, with the definition offered by Jerrold Seigel, when he speaks of the “conflict that arose at the heart [of bourgeois life]: “Bourgeois progress called for the dissolution of traditional restrictions on personal development; harmony and stability required that some new and different limits be set up in their place.” From this tug of war arose, according to Seigel, the prevalence in the nineteenth century of the image and practice of bohemianism: the refusal to fit in, the powerful impulse to withdraw to the margins of society. As he notes, “Bohemian and bourgeois were—and are—parts of a single field: they imply, require, and attract each other.”[^139] Although Cousin does not figure in Seigel’s analysis, he would be eminently at home there. The conformist Cousinian moi is the precise antitype of the bohemian, the articulation in the language of philosophical psychology of the very forces that brought the bohemian into existence. Or, put differently, the attributes of the Cousinian moi refer simultaneously to the affirmative self-image of the nineteenth-century bourgeois and the risible image of that same social creature featured in the abundant antibourgeois satire of the era.

The conformity to the status quo that Cousin purposely built into the moi further explains the oddity of Cousinian introspection. Who, after all, knew where unsupervised, genuinely open-ended self-examination might lead? To what end were individual idiosyncrasies, discontents, and maladaptations scrutinized and magnified? Clearly such a process could end in subversion. Cousin wanted to associate his system nominally with the prestigious French “family of méditatifs intérieurs,” as Sainte-Beuve called the tradition running from Montaigne to Pascal, Rousseau, and Maine de Biran.[^140] He wanted his students to appear “deep.” But he also wanted introspection to yield predictable results.

In effect, then, Cousin constructed male bourgeois subjectivity and rationalized male bourgeois power with a decidedly self-abnegating model of selfhood. The combination of volition and metaphysical limits in his recipe for the moi well exemplifies two related Foucauldian concepts: that of power as simultaneously creative and constraining and that of the modern subject as the locus of both autonomy and subjection.[^141] A particularly good exemplar of power/knowledge, Cousinian psychology singled out bourgeois males for validation by conferring on them a literal gift of dynamic selfhood, but at the same time it restricted their sphere of thought and activity to ensure their support of the political status quo. This psychology thus suggests how a ruling class controls not only its subordinates but also its own members. It concretizes Foucault’s assertions about the “anonymity” of modern power: its agents are organized in a vast machine-like network, the supervisors themselves supervised, so that “it is the apparatus as a whole that produces ‘power,’” leaving no one exempt.[^142]

During the period of the constitutional monarchy, then, a Cousinian moi was a valuable, relatively rare, and status-conferring possession. But to those on whom it was bestowed, it was a nonetheless an ambiguous, even tarnished gift.

### NOTES

The epigraph is from Maine de Biran, Journal, ed. Henri Gouhier, 3 vols. (Neuchatel: La Baconnière, 1954–57), 1: 126–27 (8 May 1816).

[^1]: 1. Maine de Biran, Journal, ed. Henri Gouhier, 3 vols. (Neuchatel: La Baconnière, 1954–57), 2: 303 (January 1821). The text cites Cousin’s adherence to Schelling as the source of a disagreement with Maine de Biran.

[^2]: 2. This theme was already developed in a work by one of Cousin’s own disciples, Jules Simon, Victor Cousin (Paris: Hachette, 1887). For more recent scholarship, see R. R. Bolgar, “Victor Cousin and Nineteenth-Century Education,” Cambridge Journal 2 (1949): 357–68; Doris Goldstein, “‘Official Philosophies’ in Modern France: The Example of Victor Cousin,” Journal of Social History (Spring 1968): 259–79; John I. Brooks, The Eclectic Legacy: Academic Philosophy and the Human Sciences in Nineteenth-Century France (Newark: University of Delaware Press, 1998); and, for the most thorough examination of the issue, Patrice Vermeren, Victor Cousin: Le jeu de la philosophie et de l’état (Paris: L’Harmattan, 1995). See also Jacques Derrida, Du droit à la philosophie (Paris: Galilée, 1990), esp. pp. 185–94, for a discussion of Cousin’s founding role in modern French philosophy instruction, his relationship to Hegel, and his mystification of philosophy by attempting to naturalize it.

[^3]: 3. For the quotation, see V. C., “Sciences philosophiques: Programme des leçons données à l’Ecole normale pendant le premier semestre de l’année 1818 . . .,” Archives philosophiques 4 (1818): 86.

[^4]: 4. Renan, Cahiers de jeunesse, in Oeuvres complètes de Ernest Renan, 10 vols. (Paris: Calmann-Lévy, 1947–61), 9: 74.

[^5]: 5. Victor Cousin, “Préface à la première édition” (1826), in Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed. (Paris: Ladrange, 1833), pp. 1–50, pp. 3, 5, for the quotations.

[^6]: 6. Duchesse de Dino (Dorothée de Courlande), Souvenirs . . . publiés par sa petite fille (Paris: Calmann-Lévy, 1908), pp. 132, 139.

[^7]: 7. Stendhal to Pauline Beyle, messidor Year X (July 1802), in Stendhal, Correspondance générale, ed. V. Del Litto, 6 vols. (Paris: Honoré Champion, 1997–99), 1: 56–57.

[^8]: 8. Martin S. Staum, Cabanis: Enlightenment and Medical Philosophy in the French Revolution (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980), p. 292.

[^9]: 9. R. R. Palmer, The Improvement of Humanity: Education and the French Revolution (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985), pp. 293–306, esp. 302.

[^10]: 10. Moniteur universel, 21 December 1812, as quoted in Prosper Alfaric, Laromiguière et son école: Etude biographique (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1929), p. 78.

[^11]: 11. Alfaric, Laromiguière, pp. 11, 14, 19–20, 25–26.

[^12]: 12. Ibid., pp. 29–31.

[^13]: 13. See Laromiguière’s handwritten curriculum vitae in the Cousin manuscripts, Bibiliothèque de la Sorbonne (henceforth, Cousin MSS), vol. 236, f. 2964. The document has been bound after three brief notes from Laromiguière to Cousin; since its last entry is Laromiguiére’s designation as Officer of the Legion of Honor in 1837, the year of his death, it seems likely that Cousin received the c.v. as an aid in the preparation of an obituary or funeral oration for his fellow philosopher. See also Alfaric, Laromiguière, pp. 35–37.

[^14]: 14. Alfaric, Laromiguière, pp. 66–70.

[^15]: 15. See Jan Goldstein, Console and Classify: The French Psychiatric Profession in the Nineteenth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), pp. 246–47.

[^16]: 16. Laromiguière, Leçons de philosophie, 2d ed., 2 vols (Paris: Brunot-Labbe, 1820), 1: 67, italics in the original.

[^17]: 17. Laromiguière, “Discours sur la langue du raisonnement, prononcé au cours de philosophie de la faculté des lettres de Paris, le 26 avril 1811,” reprinted in Leçons de philosophie, 1: 3–48, 34 for the quotation.

[^18]: 18. The adjective is that of R. R. Palmer, Improvement of Humanity, p. 322.

[^19]: 19. Alfaric, Laromiguière, pp. 97–98.

[^20]: 20. I develop this theme further in chap. 6, later.

[^21]: 21. “Projet d’un Collège des Pairs,” in Stendhal, Correspondance, 2: 550–62, esp. 550 and 552–53.

[^22]: 22. Paris: H. Verdière, Aimé André, 1821. The books give no indication of who was behind this republication.

[^23]: 23. See Achille Tardif, L’Abeille encyclopédique, ou aperçu raisonné de toutes les connaissances humaines . . . (Paris: Rousseau, 1830), pp. 362–71; the title page indicates the official approval of the work and its dedication to Charles X.

[^24]: 24. Sylvain Auroux, “La vague condillacienne,” Histoire épistémologie langage 3 (1981), fasc. 2: 107–10, 107 for the quotations.

[^25]: 25. See Jean Saphary, Essai analytique d’une métaphysique . . . dans le plan de M. Laromiguière, dont on résume d’abord les Leçons (Paris: Brunot-Labbe, 1827).

[^26]: 26. A. J. H. Valette, Cours de philosophie à la Faculté des Lettres de Paris. Discours d’ouverture. Première année (Paris: Hachette, 1829), pp. 12–14.

[^27]: 27. Ibid., p. 15, 21–24.

[^28]: 28. Roederer to Guizot, 24 October 1832, in AN: 42 AP 289, as cited by Dudley C. Barksdale, “Liberal Politics and Nascent Social Science: The Academy of Moral and Political Sciences, 1803–1852” (Ph.D. dissertation, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 1986), pp. 241–42. The term “German school” is Roederer’s. As if to vindicate Daunou’s opinion, a recent historical study of the Academy attributes its ultimately disappointing intellectual output in part to “the personality of Victor Cousin and his hegemony” over the institution. See Sophie-Anne Leterrier, L’Institution des sciences morales: L’Académie des sciences morales et politiques, 1795– 1850 (Paris: L’ Harmattan, 1995), p. 333.

[^29]: 29. I owe this concept to conversations with Daniel Segal, who refers to its rough equivalent as “folk secular knowledge.”

[^30]: 30. Francisque Bouillier, Théorie de la raison impersonnelle (Paris: Joubert, 1844), p. 331.

[^31]: 31. Louis Peisse, “Preface” to William Hamilton, Fragments de philosophie (Paris: Ladrange, 1840), p. v. An atypical disciple of Cousin who renounced an academic career, Peisse was proud of “mak[ing] war on medical materialism” as a freelance intellectual. See his twenty-seven letters to Cousin in the Cousin MSS, vol. 243, esp. #3971 of 14 May 1834 for the phrase just quoted.

[^32]: 32. Angebert to Cousin, 8 August 1829, Cousin MSS, vol. 214, #81. This letter appears in Jules Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire, M. Victor Cousin: Sa vie et sa correspondance, 3 vols. (Paris: Hachette, 1895), 3: 174–85, quotation on 182.

[^33]: 33. “Guru” is Alan Spitzer’s felicitous term for the young Cousin; see his The French Generation of 1820 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987), chap. 3.

[^34]: 34. The testimony is that of Cousin’s student, friend, and biographer, Jules Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire, Cousin, 1: 25.

[^35]: 35. Jules Simon, Victor Cousin, 3d ed. (Paris: Hachette, 1891), p. 9.

[^36]: 36. I have taken this information from an appendix called “Vie de Victor Cousin” in Vermeren, Victor Cousin, p. 353. The same information can be found in many other sources, e.g., Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire, Cousin, 1: 25; Simon, Victor Cousin, chap. 1; and Theodore Zeldin, France 1848–1945, 2 vols. (Oxford, 1973–77), 2: 411. Vermeren’s version of the schoolyard story has Cousin enrolled in school; Simon’s version has Cousin in the gutter, an urchin who comes to the aid of a schoolboy he does not know.

[^37]: 37. Adolphe Franck, “Victor Cousin,” in Moralistes et philosophes (Paris: Didier, 1872), pp. 291–321, esp. 304 for the quotation.

[^38]: 38. Cousin to Royer-Collard, 20 October 1833, in Bibliothèque de l’Institut de France, MS. 3990.

[^39]: 39. Palmer, Improvement of Humanity, pp. 310, 313.

[^40]: 40. Ibid., p. 309.

[^41]: 41. Spitzer, Generation of 1820, p. 16.

[^42]: 42. Ibid., pp. 16–17.

[^43]: 43. Ibid., chap. 2; on Cousin’s involvement in the Carbonari, see ibid., p. 63, and Vermeren, Victor Cousin, pp. 67–68.

[^44]: 44. Spitzer, Generation of 1820, chap. 6. On the independence of the Ecole polytechnique from the Université and the school’s consequent self-regulation, see A. Bobin, Aux pères de la famille et aux chefs d’institution. Questions importantes concernant les jeunes gens que l’on destine à l’Ecole polytechnique (Paris: Bachelier, 1842).

[^45]: 45. The correspondence, covering a period from the early 1820s to the early 1840s, is in the Royer-Collard papers at the Bibliothèque de l’Institut de France; see MS 3990 for the letters from Cousin and MS 2607 for Royer-Collard’s copies of his letters to Cousin.

[^46]: 46. For Royer-Collard’s successive posts, see André Schimberg, ed., Fragments philosophiques de Royer-Collard (Paris: F. Alcan, 1913), p. 319; for the date of his resignation of the presidency of the Council, see Adrian Philippe, Royer-Collard: sa vie publique, sa vie privée, sa famille (Paris: Michel Lévy, 1857), p. 122.

[^47]: 47. On the inappropriateness of the name “Doctrinaire,” see Dominique Bagge, Les idées politiques en France sous la Restauration (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1952), p. 99.

[^48]: 48. Pierre Rosanvallon, Le moment Guizot (Paris: Gallimard, 1986), p. 37.

[^49]: 49. Ibid., pp. 38–39, 41, quoting from Guizot’s writings of the 1820s.

[^50]: 50. Perhaps because his aim is to resuscitate Guizot’s political thought as an indigenous form of French liberalism, Rosanvallon does not stress the bureaucratic component of the Doctrinaire political vision. I stressed it in my discussion of the passage of the Law of 30 June 1838 and the subsequent creation of a national asylum system—a clear example of Doctrinaire institution-building by bureaucratic means; see Goldstein, Console and Classify, pp. 277–78.

[^51]: 51. Quoted in Rosanvallon, Moment Guizot, p. 223, from texts spanning the 1820s through the 1860s.

[^52]: 52. Jules Simon, “Etat de la philosophie en France: Les radicaux, le clergé, les éclectiques,” Revue des deux mondes, 1 February 1843, pp. 365–95, quotations on p. 366.

[^53]: 53. V. Cousin, Fragments philosophiques, 3d ed., 4 vols. (Paris: Ladrange, 1838–40), 1: 371, “Appendice” (to Cousin’s Ecole normale lesson plans for the years 1817 and 1818).

[^54]: 54. Cousin to Hegel, 1 August 1826, in Hegel: The Letters, trans. Clark Butler and Christiane Seiler (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1984), p. 639.

[^55]: 55. Cousin, Introduction à l’histoire de la philosophie (Paris: Pichon et Didier, 1828), Lesson 13, pp. 42–43. Each lesson is separately paginated in this edition.

[^56]: 56. Victor Cousin, “Préface de la deuxième édition,” Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed. (Paris: Ladrange, 1833), p. lx.

[^57]: 57. The use of the term juste-milieu to describe the signature political mission of the July Monarchy goes back at least as far as a public speech made by King Louis-Philippe in January 1831; see Paul Robert, Dictionnaire alphabétique et analogique de la langue française.

[^58]: 58. Hippolyte Taine, Les philosophes du XIXe siècle en France (1857), 9th ed. (Paris: Hachette, 1905) p. 311; also quoted in Spitzer, Generation of 1820, p. 75. See ibid., p. 73, for the age of Cousin’s audience.

[^59]: 59. “Discours prononcé à l’ouverture du cours, le 4 décembre 1817,” in Victor Cousin, Du vrai, du beau, et du bien, 16th ed. (Paris: Didier, 1872), p. 9.

[^60]: 60. Stendhal, Racine et Shakespeare, ed. Henri Martineau (Paris: Le Divan, 1928), pt. 2, Letter 6, pp. 137–39, my italics; also quoted in Spitzer, Generation of 1820, p. 81.

[^61]: 61. Sorbonne MS 1907, a bound notebook of notes on Cousin’s course of 11 December 1819 to 18 March 1820, MS p. 9.

[^62]: 62. Armand Marrast, Examen critique du cours de philosophie de M. Cousin (leçon par leçon) (Paris: Corréard Jeune, 1828–29), p. 7.

[^63]: 63. Comte to Valat, 3 November 1824, in Auguste Comte, Correspondance générale et confessions, ed. P. E. de Berrêdo and P. Arnaud, 8 vols. (Paris: Ecole des Hautes Etudes, 1973–90), 1: 132.

[^64]: 64. Taine, Les philosophes classiques, p. 102.

[^65]: 65. Spitzer, Generation of 1820, p. 72.

[^66]: 66. Anne Martin-Fugier, La vie élégante, ou la formation du Tout-Paris, 1815–1848 (Paris: Fayard, 1990), p. 244.

[^67]: 67. Anonymous review of V. Cousin, Cours de philosophie, in Edinburgh Review 50 (October 1829): 194–221, quotation on 198.

[^68]: 68. Sorbonne MS 1907, MS p. 5, my emphasis. The printed catalogue of Sorbonne manuscripts identifies the notetaker as Louis de Raynal, “then a student, later attorney general at the Cour de Cassation.”

[^69]: 69. See Cousin, Premiers essais de philosophie, 3d ed. (Paris: Librairie nouvelle, 1855), p. 24. This volume provides a version of the text of Cousin’s Sorbonne lectures of 1815–16 as well as a course outline for those of 1816–17.

[^70]: 70. Cousin, Introduction à l’histoire de la philosophie, Lesson 13, p. 25.

[^71]: 71. See, e.g., “Les fragments théoriques, 1812–1813,” in Fragments de Royer-Collard, esp. pp. 20–40.

[^72]: 72. Cousin, Premiers essais, pp. 128–29, 132, 134, 138.

[^73]: 73. Ibid., pp. 134–36.

[^74]: 74. Cousin, “Préface à la première èdition,” Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed., pp. 11–12.

[^75]: 75. See Condillac, Traité des animaux (1755) in Oeuvres philosophiques de Condillac, ed. Georges Le Roy, 3 vols. (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1947–51), 1: 342.

[^76]: 76. Cousin, “Préface à la premiere édition,” Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed., pp. 13–14.

[^77]: 77. Cousin, Introduction à l’histoire de la philosophie, Lesson 5, p. 15. He said much the same thing two years earlier; see “Préface à la première édition,” Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed., p. 38.

[^78]: 78. Cousin, “Préface de la deuxième édition,” Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed., p. xiv.

[^79]: 79. For the vestibule metaphor, see Cousin, Introduction à l’histoire de la philosophie, Lesson 13, p. 14. For a slightly different version of the metaphor, see “Préface à la première édition,” Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed., p. 12.

[^80]: 80. Cousin to Hegel, 1 August 1826, in Hegel: The Letters, p. 639.

[^81]: 81. “Discours de M. Cousin,” Institut royal de France. Académie des sciences morales et politiques. Funérailles de M. Jouffroy . . . le 3 mars 1842 (Paris: Impr. de F. Didot, n.d.), pp. 6–7.

[^82]: 82. Cousin, “Préface à la première édition,” Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed., p. 39.

[^83]: 83. Victor Cousin, Du vrai, du beau et du bien, 16th ed. (Paris: Hachette, 1872), opening sentence of Lesson 2, p. 36.

[^84]: 84. While the 1818 lectures appeared in print earlier, Cousin’s textbook version of them, called Du vrai, du beau et du bien, was first published in 1853. A second, slightly augmented edition of 1854 went through at least seventeen printings during the nineteenth century, according to the catalog of the BN.

[^85]: 85. See “Du Fait de conscience,” a brief excerpt from Cousin’s 1817 Sorbonne course, in his Premiers essais, pp. 242–49, reprinted in his Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed., pp. 242–52. This text discusses the three components of consciousness but does not explicitly locate the term moi with respect to them.

[^86]: 86. “Préface à la première édition,” Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed., pp. 17, 25.

[^87]: 87. “Reason is impersonal by its nature,” Cousin declared; see ibid., p. 18. One of Cousin’s students wrote an entire book on impersonal reason, regarding it as among Cousin’s “glories” as well as the “link uniting the whole eclectic school,” see Bouillier, Preface, Théorie de la raison impersonnelle, pp. ii–iv.

[^88]: 88. Cousin, Introduction à l’histoire de la philosophie, Lesson 5, pp. 9–10, my italics.

[^89]: 89. Maine de Biran, Journal, 2: 24–26 (17–26 March 1817). The manuscript in question was written by the aging Enlightenment philosophe, the abbé André Morellet (1727–1819).

[^90]: 90. Ibid., 2: 138 (29 July 1817).

[^91]: 91. Cousin, Cours d’histoire de la philosophie morale au 18e siècle, professé à la Faculté des Lettres en 1819 et 1820, ed. E. Vacherot (Paris: Ladrange, 1841), pp. 11–13.

[^92]: 92. John Locke, The Second Treatise of Government, ed. T. P. Peardon (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1952), chap. 5, para. 25–27, 44, pp. 16–17, 27.

[^93]: 93. Antoine-Louis-Claude Destutt de Tracy, Traité de la volonté et de ses effets (1st ed. 1815), 2d ed. (Paris: Courcier, 1818; reprint, Geneva: Slatkine, 1984), pp. 49, 60–63, 66–67.

[^94]: 94. Michel Foucault, Résumé des cours, 1970–1982 (Paris: Julliard, 1989), pp. 133–34. I discuss this issue at length in “Foucault and the Post-Revolutionary Self: The Uses of Cousinian Pedagogy in Nineteenth-Century France,” in Jan Goldstein, ed., Foucault and the Writing of History (Oxford: Blackwell, 1994), pp. 99–115, 276–80, and “Foucault’s Technologies of the Self and the Cultural History of Identity,” Arcadia 33 (1998): 46–63.

[^95]: 95. The more succinct “introspection” was a late seventeenth-century English coinage that enjoyed currency in both ordinary and technical language on the other side of the Channel but did not enter French until the early twentieth century; see “Introspection” in André Lalande, Vocabulaire technique et critique de philosophie, 16th ed. (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1988).

[^96]: 96. Victor Cousin, “Préface à la première édition,” Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed. (Paris: Ladrange, 1833), pp. 11–13, 49–50.

[^97]: 97. Victor Cousin, “Appendice,” in Fragments philosophiques, 3d ed., 4 vols. (Paris: Ladrange, 1838–40), 1: 370–71.

[^98]: 98. Auguste Comte, Cours de philosophie positive, Leçons 1 à 45, ed. Michel Serres, François Dagognet, and Allal Sinaceur (Paris: Hermann, 1975), Lesson 45, esp. pp. 853–54.

[^99]: 99. Stendhal, “Sketch of Parisian Society,” in Stéphane Douailler et al., eds. La philosophie saisie par l’état: Petits écrits sur l’enseignement philosophique en France, 1789–1900 (Paris: Aubier, 1988), pp. 177–85, 183 for the quotation. This text originally appeared in 1828 in the New Monthly Magazine.

[^100]: 100. Ibid., p. 185.

[^101]: 101. Locke, Essai philosophique concernant l’entendement humain, trans. Pierre Coste, 4th ed. (Amsterdam: Pierre Mortier, 1742), p. 264 n. 2.

[^102]: 102. See Emile Saisset, “Sens,” Dictionnaire des sciences philosophiques 6: 578–87, esp. 578.

[^103]: 103. Cousin, Introduction à l’histoire de la philosophie, Lesson 2, pp. 5–6.

[^104]: 104. Ibid., Lesson 5, p. 35.

[^105]: 105. Cousin, “Préface de la deuxième édition,” Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed., p. viii.

[^106]: 106. Introduction à l’histoire de la philosophie, Lesson 1, p. 4.

[^107]: 107. Cousin, “Préface de la deuxième édition,” Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed., p. xxxv.

[^108]: 108. Ibid., p. xv.

[^109]: 109. “When I push one billiard ball into another, it is not the billiard ball that truly causes the movement that it imparts, for that movement has been imparted to it by the hand, by the muscles that, in the mystery of our physiological organization, are at the service of the will.” Cousin, “Préface à la première édition,” Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed., p. 26.

[^110]: 110. Alain Girard, Le journal intime, 2d ed. (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1986), Introduction.

[^111]: 111. Gouhier, Introduction to Maine de Biran, Journal, 1: x–xi.

[^112]: 112. Ernest Bersot, “La philosophie de Rousseau,” Liberté de penser 2 (June– December 1848): 118–46, quotations on 130–31.

[^113]: 113. A. Charma, Du sommeil (Paris: Hachette, 1851), esp. pp. 4, 12–14.

[^114]: 114. Vacherot to Cousin, 4 April 1836, Cousin MSS, vol. 251, #5041.

[^115]: 115. Cousin, Introduction à l’histoire de la philosophie, Lesson 5, pp. 39–40. For a similar statement, see “Préface à la première édition,” Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed., p. 45.

[^116]: 116. See Roger-Pol Droit, “‘Cette déplorable idée de l’anéantissement’: note sur Cousin, l’Inde et le bouddhisme,” Corpus, revue de philosophie, no. 18–19 (1991): 85–103.

[^117]: 117. Jouffroy, De la politique de la France en Afrique (Paris: Impr. de A. Henry, 1840; reprint, with a new introduction, of his 1838 Revue des deux mondes article of the same title). See, e.g., pp. 1, 9–13.

[^118]: 118. See Pauline Franck to Adolphe Franck, 31 January 1844, which quotes the newspaper La Quotidienne as saying of Adolphe’s election to the Institut, “‘Monsieur Cousin looked for his Jew to bring to the Institut. This Jew has no other qualification for being chosen than that he is a Jew.’” Pauline Franck, Une vie de femme: Lettres intimes (Tours: Impr. Paul Bousrez, 1898), p. 497.

[^119]: 119. The following material is developed at greater length in my article, “Saying ‘I’: Victor Cousin, Caroline Angebert, and the Politics of Selfhood in Nineteenth-Century France,” in Rediscovering History: Culture, Politics, and the Psyche, ed. Michael S. Roth (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1994), pp. 321–35.

[^120]: 120. Cousin, Introduction à l’histoire de la philosophie, Lesson 8, p. 19; Lesson 9, p. 15.

[^121]: 121. Stendhal to Pauline Beyle, 1 February 1811, in Stendahl, Correspondance générale, 2: 134; see also Stendhal to Pauline Beyle, July 1802, ibid., 1: 57.

[^122]: 122. Angebert to Cousin, 30 September 1828, Cousin MSS, vol. 214, # 77.

[^123]: 123. Cabanis, Rapports du physique et du moral de l’homme (1802), Memoir 5, “De l’influence des sexes sur le caractère des idées et des affections morales,” in Oeuvres philosophiques de Cabanis, ed. Claude Lehec and Jean Cazeneuve, 2 vols. (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1956), 1: 272–315.

[^124]: 124. See Erica Harth, Cartesian Women: Versions and Subversions of Rational Discourse in the Old Regime (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1992), chap. 2.

[^125]: 125. Cousin to Angebert, n.d., in Léon Séché, Les amitiés de Lamartine, 1st ser., 2d ed. (Paris: Mercure de France, 1911), pp. 187–88.

[^126]: 126. Angebert to Cousin, 12 October 1828, Cousin MSS, vol. 214, #78.

[^127]: 127. “Circulaire de M. le Ministre de l’instruction publique, du 17 juillet 1840, relative au nouveau règlement du baccalauréat ès lettres,” in Victor Cousin, Défense de l’Université et de la philosophie, 3d ed. (Paris: Joubert, 1844), pp. 363–64.

[^128]: 128. Victor Cousin, “Les femmes illustres du dix-septième siècle,” Revue des deux mondes, 15 January 1844, pp. 193–203, esp. pp. 194–95. The article was reprinted as the preface to Cousin’s Jacqueline Pascal (Paris: Didier, 1845).

[^129]: 129. Francisque Bouillier to Cousin, 12 October 1839, Cousin MSS, vol. 219, #778.

[^130]: 130. Victor Cousin, Du vrai, du beau et du bien (Paris: Didier, 1853), p. 43 n. 1. This book, in which Cousin sought “to assemble into a doctrinal corpus the theories scattered through our different works,” was based on his earliest teaching; see “Avant-propos,” p. i. Hence the retrospective quality of the remark quoted.

[^131]: 131. BN MSS, Renan papers, n.a.f. 11481, “Notes et remarques sur cours de M. Cousin sur les idées absolues du vrai, du beau et du bien,” fols. 554v–555.

[^132]: 132. Cousin’s most sustained discussion of this topic is the undated text, “Du premier et du dernier fait du conscience, ou de la spontanéité et de la réflexion,” in his Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed., pp. 351–61, esp. 351.

[^133]: 133. Cousin, “Préface à la première édition,” Fragmens philosophiques, 2d ed., p. 45, my italics.

[^134]: 134. Introduction à l’histoire de la philosophie, Lesson 8, p. 15.

[^135]: 135. Cousin, Du vrai, du beau et du bien (1853), pp. 42–43, my italics.

[^136]: 136. Renan, “Notes et remarques,” fols. 555.

[^137]: 137. See Cousin, Philosophie populaire, suivie de la première partie de la profession de foi du vicaire savoyard . . . (Paris: Pagnerre, 1848), pp. 1–14, quotations on pp. 4, 13. On the “petits traités,” see Leterrier, Institution des sciences morales, pp. 315–22.

[^138]: 138. Cousin, Philosophie populaire, pp. 14–16.

[^139]: 139. Jerrold Seigel, Bohemian Paris: Culture, Politics, and the Boundaries of Bourgeois Life, 1830–1930 (New York: Viking, 1986), pp. 5, 10–11.

[^140]: 140. C.-A. Sainte-Beuve, “Maine de Biran,” in Causeries de lundi, 15 vols. (Paris: Garnier, n.d.), 13: 305.

[^141]: 141. The key texts here are, with respect to power, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of Prison, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: Pantheon, 1977), p. 194, and The History of Sexuality, vol. 1: An Introduction, trans. Robert Hurley (New York: Vintage, 1980), p. 60. See also my discussion of subjectivity in “Foucault and the Post-Revolutionary Self,” pp. 108–11.

[^142]: 142. Foucault, Discipline and Punish, p. 177.
