## 5 Cousinian Hegemony

The enemy is disciplined. Let us discipline ourselves.

Victor Cousin, 1843

A French bourgeois household of the era of the July Monarchy might have owned and displayed on its bookshelves the Dictionnaire de la conversation et de la lecture, a multivolume, all-purpose reference work intended to serve the everyday needs of the educated middle-class family. Turning to its article, “Moi,” the reader would find these remarkable opening lines:

> That word [moi], which formerly belonged only to the domain of grammar and was nothing more than the most notable of pronouns, has become, after the word “God,” the substantive noun par excellence. It now plays, and justly so, a powerful role in philosophy. In fact, we could say without exaggeration that it epitomizes all of philosophy.[^1]

The moi, the author informs us, has acquired preeminence among the concepts of academic philosophy. But that is not all. In its new, philosophically inflected guise—no longer merely a humble grammatical element but an entity exceeded in ontological status only by the divinity—the word has also entered ordinary speech. People are apparently talking more about the self; they are taking their selves more seriously.

This brief passage from a widely consulted text of the period testifies to the impact of Cousinianism on the general culture of early nineteenth-century France. Its author was, to be sure, a minor Cousinian philosopher, no doubt biased in favor of exaggerating the influence of his teacher.[^2] Nonetheless, it is significant that the editors of the Dictionnaire, who prided themselves on toeing no party line and giving voice to divergent opinions,[^3] saw fit to include the rubric “Moi” in their reference work in the first place. Having once made that decision, they doubtless recognized that the entry could be consigned only to a Cousinian: while all the psychologies of the period mentioned the self, only Cousin’s made the self its signature concept.

How can we account for the cultural situation that the Dictionnaire editors had perceived, one in which Cousinianism and its iconic moi had moved beyond the lecture halls of the Ecole normale supérieure and the Paris Faculty of Letters and entered the mainstream? Given the dryness and difficulty of the relevant texts, an effect of such magnitude could hardly have been accomplished by individual readers alone, by a bevy of Caroline Angeberts. More likely an institutional intervention was responsible. In fact, from 1832 on, the two institutions that had disseminated Cousinianism during the 1820s, both located in the capital, were supplemented by a third, vastly broader in scope: the entire lycée system of France. If French bureaucrats could envisage the late eighteenth-century hospital as a “healing machine,”[^4] so too might the nineteenth-century state-run secondary school be justly imagined as a machine for the production of selfhood. The hegemony of Cousinianism in France, its ability to beat out its competitors and impose its concept of the self on a significant segment of the population, rested first and foremost on Cousin’s capture of the lycée curriculum.

Not every supporter of Cousinianism approved of the route the maître had taken. At least one, Caroline Angebert, believed that his capacity to influence the future of France lay in his writing and in his personal presence at the lectern. “I never experienced a more painful feeling,” she wrote him reproachfully some months after the July Revolution, “than the day I learned that you were abandoning your teaching” for a career at the Ministry of Education. No doubt he would do a lot of good there, she acknowledged, but he would not ensure the triumph of his philosophy. The bureaucracy was notoriously fickle: “another, after you, can destroy your work; another can even arrange to have you conveniently replaced.” And even if he succeeded at the administrative game, he would not thereby win the battle for the hearts and minds of Frenchmen, a battle that would take place in what Angebert called society:

> In order to make a philosophy dominant, Sir, does it suffice to implant it in the system of public education? Wouldn’t it be like a dead language if it lacked roots in society? How many would believe in Christianity if its dogmas were taught and practiced [only] in the colleges? Social education is more powerful today. If you recognize that truth, if you want your doctrine to be propagated, how can you leave the task to someone else?[^5]

But Angebert need not have worried. As a fellow traveler of the Doctrinaires and a protégé of Royer-Collard, Cousin had thrown in his lot with the expanding, post-Revolutionary state educational system with all due deliberation; moreover, he had done so precisely because he wanted to knit together government and society and see his philosophy achieve dominance through active propagation. In sum, Cousin and Angebert shared the same goals for eclecticism but, of the two, he proved to have the more up-to-date and accurate assessment of the strategic possibilities of educational institutionalization.

### Institutionalizing Psychology: The Teamwork of Cousin and Guizot

Cousin’s pedagogical takeover was not a purely individual tour de force. Its roots lay deep in Doctrinaire political culture, and its realization hinged especially on the long political association of Cousin and Guizot. Under the Empire, both young men belonged to the politically tinged philosophical circle around their common mentor, Royer-Collard.[^6] When the Université was subjected to clerical repression in the early 1820s, the two were dramatically paired as martyred Sorbonne professors, suspended from their teaching of philosophy and history, respectively, because of their liberal ideas and the oratorical force with which they presented them.[^7] When, still wandering in the political wilderness, Guizot attempted to form a small society of moral and political sciences in 1824 to keep the Doctrinaire viewpoint alive, he named Cousin, in a personal letter on the subject, as one of the founding members—although his reference to him as “Cousin” rather than by the first name he employed for others suggests that long affiliation had not, in their case, blossomed into intimate rapport.[^8] And when the “three glorious days” of the July 1830 Revolution unfolded, Cousin was one of the inner circle that gathered at Guizot’s apartment to plot strategy.[^9]

The 1830 Revolution marked the ascension of the Doctrinaires to power and, if Guizot led that collective movement, Cousin did not lag far behind. When Guizot was named minister of public instruction in 1832, Cousin was already a member of the five-man Royal Council of Public Instruction—indeed he had received this appointment within weeks of the July Revolution. As one newspaper quipped, “It is not solely as a philosopher that Cousin has come to power but as a representative of a triumphant doctrine; that is his credential and his pitfall.”[^10] The primary school law of 1833, the great accomplishment of Guizot’s ministry, may actually have been penned by Cousin. At the very least, it drew heavily on the data about Prussian primary education that Cousin had gathered firsthand in 1831—his trip subsidized by the government and his personal services well remunerated—and published in book form two years later.[^11] The law is relevant to us here as an example of the Doctrinaire use of education as social policy, a maneuver that would figure as well in the institutionalization of Cousinian psychology. As Cousin said when he wrote to a German acquaintance in 1833, enclosing the text of the law, “[the law’s] eclectic spirit will enable you to guess its author.”[^12]

What was characteristically Doctrinaire and eclectic about the law of 1833 was its provision for two distinct levels of primary education, the usual elementary one (the three R’s plus moral instruction) and a more innovative superior one (drawing, geometry, physical science, natural history, some history, and geography). Both levels were noncompulsory and offered free of charge to those unable to pay. The purpose of the higher level—for which Cousin had found a precedent in contemporary Prussia—was to offer the popular classes a juste-milieu between social opportunity and social restriction. According to Doctrinaire logic, public utility required that able members of the lower classes who wished to develop their intellects not be stifled. At the same time, prudence dictated that such development be contained within appropriate limits. The talented children of the poor should have their thirst for learning satisfied among their peers in the superior primary school, an institution dedicated solely to that purpose. They should not be encouraged to enter the track of full-fledged secondary education where, mingling with the sons of the bourgeoisie, they would acquire outsized ambitions, expose themselves to disappointment and embitterment, and thus become potentially destabilizing agents in society. The superior primary school was, in other words, the translation into educational policy of the Doctrinaires’ overriding fear of renewed revolution and their obsession with imposing a straitjacket of order on all manifestations of social mobility.[^13]

In other ways, too, the 1833 law, called “la loi Guizot” from its inception, embodied the basic sociopolitical philosophy of both Guizot and Cousin. First, the law placed a relative emphasis on state centralization: in the requirement that more teacher training institutions, the joint responsibility of state and department, be established and in the expectation that these écoles normales would function as a node for the permeation of society by government in its benign, noncoercive aspect; and also in the provision for a significant component of state authority over the primary schools, an authority shared with the localities and the Church. Second, the law was noteworthy for the rigor with which it was enforced, both by Guizot during the four years of his ministry and by successive ministers following his example. A stream of decrees, circulars, and letters treating the interpretation of the law emanated from Guizot’s office; the minister had all correspondence pointing out defects and omissions in the law collected and classified. It was Guizot who created the venerable French “tradition whereby the minister of public instruction concerned himself with the slightest detail of the smallest school.”[^14]

These features—state centralization, rigorous execution of measures enacted into law, and especially the use of educational policy to bolster social hierarchy or, at least, monitor social mobility—recurred in the institutionalization of Cousinian psychology in the lycée system.

Given the close collaboration between the two men, it is not surprising that the dissemination of a “correct” psychology interested Guizot as well as Cousin, even if the former failed to elevate that task to his life’s mission. Guizot was a serious enough participant in the metaphysical society that met in Maine de Biran’s home during the early years of the Restoration that his host recorded in his journal the precise views about the moi that the budding politician expressed on October 17, 1814—views that even provoked him to prepare a “Reply to Monsieur Guizot.”[^15] With Royer-Collard, Guizot edited the Archives philosophiques, politiques et littéraires, a short-lived journal whose dates, 1817–18, coincided with the period during which Cousin hammered out the main lines of his philosophy in his courses at the Faculty of Letters. In fact the journal’s editorial board, which convened regularly and included Maine de Biran, regarded itself as the successor to Maine de Biran’s metaphysical society. Calling himself the “old man of the gang,” Biran agreed to collaborate in the venture (he and Cousin were its joint philosophy editors) in order to “give a moral and useful direction to psychological doctrines.”[^16]

As editor of and a contributor to the Encyclopédie progressive, a never-completed project that he began in the waning years of the Restoration, Guizot dropped hints about his familiarity with Cousin’s psychology. Noting that Diderot and d’Alembert had adopted as their scheme for the classification of human knowledge in the great Encyclopédie the division of the human mind into the faculties of memory, reason, and imagination, Guizot stressed the arbitrariness of such a choice and enumerated alternatives. Among them, “One could find in the opposition of man and the world, of spectator and spectacle, of moi and non-moi, a principle of classification taken, like theirs, from inside ourselves and yet very different.”[^17] The comment implicitly called attention to two competing psychologies: the sensationalism that had dictated the shape of the tree of knowledge in the eighteenth-century Encyclopédie, and Cousinianism, replete with its conceptual borrowings from Kant and Fichte.

A second and less canonical article, “Abrégé,” reveals more about Guizot’s position on psychology. Here he addressed the question of the textual form in which different sciences could be transmitted and, by extension, who would be able to learn them. The question itself thus sprang from characteristically Doctrinaire concerns about supplying each social class with just the amount of knowledge suited to it, meticulously avoiding both insufficiency and excess.

Abrégés, a term that included summaries and concise handbooks, were proliferating, Guizot announced at the beginning of this article. Even encyclopedias such as his own were nothing but collections of such abrégés. Since contemporaries alternately hailed and damned this publishing trend (the sensationalists, as shown in Chapter 2, were enthusiastic advocates, who hoped to use the abrégé to transmit their science to the humblest citizens), Guizot sought a balanced assessment of it. On the negative side, he observed, reading a summary of a science taught a person only the results of that science, not how to think in accordance with its central suppositions or to pursue research in the same vein. In other words, abrégés were, in Guizot’s phrase, deficient in “fecundity.” But if they could not mold creative scientists, abrégés were, on the positive side, still useful in dispelling the ignorance of nonspecialists who encountered various sciences in their daily lives. As such they were, said Guizot, employing a key concept of Western modernity that he personally did so much to define, “a means of civilization.”[^18] Abrégés also supplied a “public” for savants, ensuring another feature of civilization: that the taste for scientific knowledge would be widespread in society instead of the monopoly of the few.[^19]

Every science was not, however, equally amenable to summary. The so-called “aristocratic sciences” were, by their nature, inaccessible “to a casual attention, a curiosity without labor”; they did not “allow the crowd casually to gather their fruits.” Within this category of the hard-to-get were those sciences lacking a direct practical application, such as mathematics; those that required mastery of an immense number of facts, such as philology; and those whose objects were intrinsically vague, such as psychology.[^20] With respect to this last aristocratic science, Guizot cited a recently published essay by a brilliant spokesman for Cousinian-style psychology, Théodore Jouffroy. Only a few years younger than Cousin, Jouffroy had been Cousin’s student at the Ecole normale supérieure, but chronic ill health prevented his entrance into an ordinary academic career. He and Guizot were bound by particularly warm ties of friendship,[^21] in contrast to the pragmatic and durable but rather cool alliance that joined Cousin and Guizot.

The essay cited by Guizot was Jouffroy’s long preface to his translation of the Scottish philosopher Dugald Stewart. In this text Jouffroy identified as “popular” and ascribed to “the public” the view that only those phenomena apprehended by the senses possessed certainty—once again, an early nineteenth-century Frenchman depicted sensationalism as a form of vernacular knowledge. Jouffroy went on to demur from this accepted wisdom, upholding instead the existence and absolute certainty of the non-sensory phenomena of consciousness. “Invisible to the eye, intangible to the hand, impervious to the most perfect microscope and scalpel,” they were nonetheless fully “observable.”[^22] Still, Guizot continued, “no one can enter into possession of such a science [of consciousness] without discovering it, so to speak, himself, and in its entirety.”[^23] In other words, Guizot assigned a precise social location to psychology of the introspective, Cousinian variety. It utterly eluded superficial popular dissemination; it was within the grasp only of those who studied it with such thoroughness and care that they had personally reenacted the founding of the science.

Guizot had enough stake in the teaching of psychology to have kept among his papers a manuscript syllabus for the second part of a course in basic psychology. The document is written in Jouffroy’s hand. Tellingly, in terms of Doctrinaire preoccupations, the absent first part of the syllabus dealt with the intellect, while the carefully preserved second part concerned moral psychology and focused on the moi as the “voluntary force.” Inventorying the different factors that impinged upon deliberations of the will, Jouffroy’s manuscript listed the pleasures and pains caused by the moi itself, by so-called “pure activity.” He thus explicitly detailed an emotional repertory and realm of experience accessible only to the literally self-possessed elite who had successfully laid hold of the moi: the “pleasure derived from the consciousness of activity of the moi, the pleasure derived from the consciousness of easeful and full deployment of the activity of the moi; and the pain derived from consciousness of the difficult, incomplete, and obstructed deployment of the activity of the moi.” The provenance of this manuscript is unclear: since its heading says nothing about where the course was actually taught, Jouffroy may even have prepared it at Guizot’s request as a kind of blueprint for a widely replicable course of the future.[^24]

But the blueprint for the teaching of psychology in early nineteenth-century French schools that was in fact adopted—and, moreover, adopted during Guizot’s tenure as minister of public instruction—was not Jouffroy’s but Cousin’s. The archives record nothing of the circumstances surrounding this quasi-event, but on September 28, 1832, the Royal Council of Public Instruction, which counted Cousin among its members, decreed an innovation in the standard philosophy course in the lycées (which were once again called by their Old Regime name, collèges, from the beginning of the Restoration until the Revolution of 1848).[^25] A subject called “Psichologie” (sic) was to be added to the course as its first substantive section; indeed the decree spoke of the “necessity of commencing the study of philosophy by psychology.” The new curriculum included learning about “consciousness and the certitude appropriate to it,” understanding “voluntary and free activity” so as to be able to “describe the phenomenon of the will and all the circumstances surrounding it,” and grasping the key concept of the “moi, its identity and unity.”[^26] True to form, Guizot sent out a circular to all the rectors of the academies six months later, emphasizing the importance of conformity to the new syllabus not only in its content but also in the order of presentation of topics.[^27] The strategy for the implantation of Cousinianism must be seen very much as the combined effort of Cousin and Guizot: unlike other prominent ministers of education during the July Monarchy, Guizot affiliated himself closely with the Royal Council of Public Instruction (Cousin’s main power base at this date), seeing this organ of the corporate Université as his ally rather than his rival.[^28]

The two men could hardly have chosen a more conspicuous place in the curriculum in which to insert the new subject matter. The lycée classe de philosophie of the third and last year was universally regarded in France as the “crown” of secondary education, a culmination that reproduced the ontological order in the scholastic one. Philosophy loomed so large that the entire third year of lycée instruction was often referred to metonymically as the “philosophy class.” Nor was the philosophy professor a run-of-the-mill teacher; by spending so many hours with his students and initiating them into a type of knowledge they had never before encountered, he was supposed to exert an extraordinary degree of influence over them. Furthermore, this instruction was seen as quintessentially French, an expression of the national genius, because the French included much more intensive training in philosophy as part of secondary education than did their neighbors.[^29] At the end of the nineteenth century, when a suggestion was made that philosophy be introduced in small, preparatory doses earlier in the lycée curriculum, a retired Cousinian forcefully reiterated the mystique of the classe de philosophie. The proposed pedagogical measure, he said, “would be fatal to philosophy itself by removing from it precisely that trait of novelty that brings forth astonishment [in the student] while at the same time commanding respect and provoking attraction. What characterizes philosophy in relation to subjects taught earlier is that it considers thought in its nakedness. . . .”[^30]

Situating psychology in the lycée also allowed that subject matter to partake automatically of the class and gender discriminations that had defined the lycée since its Napoleonic inception: designed to provide civil servants for the state, the lycée would remain until the 1880s the exclusive preserve of bourgeois males. The institutional locus of psychology thus reinforced Cousin’s insistence that only a small fraction of the population possessed the intellectual finesse necessary to seize the moi; it meshed as well with Guizot’s identification of psychology as an elite science requiring total immersion on the part of the student and firsthand rediscovery of its basic tenets. Of course, Guizot’s theory of the middle class as the universal class—the one accessible to all who had capacité—completed the picture. It identified intellectual talent, as measured by the ability to get rich and thus meet the property qualifications for voting under the monarchie censitaire, with membership in the bourgeoisie.[^31] A seamless ideology, then, selected the bourgeoisie for training in selfhood.

The social-class specificity of instruction in psychology at this date was highly nuanced. Consider the posture of a minor Cousinian, A.-Jacques Matter—the same minor Cousinian, in fact, responsible for the article “Moi” in the Dictionnaire de la conversation et de la lecture—when writing a handbook for primary schoolteachers in the 1840s. Both psychology and its offshoot pedagogy were, he opined, indispensable preparation for the members of this occupational group. Because they needed skill in the “art of communicating” to their pupils, they would benefit greatly from familiarity with the human mental faculties and from expertise in the means of developing them. But (although Matter does not say this) primary schoolteachers were drawn from the lower middle classes and below.[^32] Hence, Matter assumed that his readers would not even know what the term “psychology” meant unless he provided them with a definition.[^33] Sketching the rudiments of that arcane discipline, he informed them that one of the first accomplishments of thought was to make a clear distinction between our senses and external objects. He elaborated this point with a touch of condescension:

> That is what the philosophers call “distinguishing the interior world from the exterior world, the moi from the non-moi,” scientific words that I would never employ and that I would spare myself the trouble of mentioning to you if they did not figure in certain books that you might find useful. . . .[^34]

In this way Matter, a representative Cousinian, finely calibrated his scientific language to the social echelon, lower than his own, from which the corps of schoolteachers was recruited. Recognizing immediately that their social station precluded lycée attendance, he took pains to specify that psychology was a subject taught in secondary school.[^35] He knew that the term moi, construed in a technical sense, would likely be outside their ken. A more striking testimony to the social-class identity of psychology under the July Monarchy can hardly be imagined.

In its indelible association with the elite, the possession of an articulable moi thus began to function under the July Monarchy as a marker of social status, much like the ability to read Latin in early modern Europe. Indeed the moi might seem to have been the designated successor of Latinity in this regard since the same reform of 1832 which introduced psychology into the curriculum also suppressed the philosophy examination in Latin as a requirement for the baccalaureate.[^36] However, the periodization is rather more complicated. During the July Monarchy efforts were made, alternately, to erode and to shore up the classical secondary curriculum (which would, in fact, not lose its privileged position until 1902).[^37] When he served as minister of public education for eight months in 1840, Cousin was associated with the traditionalist position.[^38] So was Guizot, who appeared on the floor of the Chamber of Deputies during his term as minister of public instruction to answer an impromptu attack on the preference his budget accorded to the classics.[^39] The moi and classical learning thus overlapped in nineteenth-century French public education as redundant, standardized ways to distinguish the socially dominant from the marginal. What the moi contributed to this mechanism of distinction was a marker that dug deeper and more intimately into the individual’s sense of self, one that concerned a dialogue of the self with the self.

The great bulwark of Cousinian institutionalization was the 1832 lycée curriculum in philosophy, reaffirmed in 1840 with only the most minor additions and then basically unchanged until 1874.[^40] But, to be fully effective, this centerpiece required a host of supporting institutions.

During the July Monarchy Cousin furnished most of this infrastructure almost single-handedly through the venerable French practice of le cumul—the holding of posts simultaneously. Responding to accusations that Cousin was earning an exorbitant income by combining multiple salaries, Guizot attempted to set the record straight during his tenure as minister of public instruction (1832–36) by listing all of his colleague’s appointments and the remunerations each carried. Cousin was, as already mentioned, a member of the Royal Council of Public Instruction (his main job, said Guizot, earning him 9,000 francs a year). Despite his humble birth, he had been named a peer of France and sat in the Chamber of Peers (no additional income, an “illustrious burden”); he held memberships in the Institut de France, the Académie française, and the Academy of Moral and Political Sciences (“a modest salary” for the first only). He held a chair in philosophy at the Sorbonne (negative income since he had to pay a substitute professor out of his own pocket). In his capacity as councilor of public instruction, he had since 1833 been entrusted with the general supervision of the Ecole normale supérieure, a task previously shared by all the councilors. If he received no additional financial benefit from this charge, it did offer him firm control over France’s principal hatchery of philosophy professors. As Guizot noted, “Monsieur Cousin directs everything related to the philosophical sciences, and everyone has paid tribute to the strong impulsion that he has stamped on this part of public service and to the numerous improvements that he has introduced.”[^41]

In 1840 Cousin created the new status of agrégé in philosophy—that is, a mandatory certification for all who would teach philosophy at the highest level of the state educational system, the Faculties of Letters in Paris and the departments. At the same time, he added to his official titles that of president of the jury of the annual concours, or public competition, that granted this qualification. The influence he exercised in his new post was, he apparently believed, indispensable to the success of his educational project. “My health is miserable,” he noted glumly in a letter to a former student in the summer of 1845. “But if I go to take the waters, who will pass the agrégation? I will remain, then, [in Paris] for the agrégation.”[^42]

The culmination of the institutional edifice of Cousinianism was the six-volume Dictionnaire des sciences philosophiques (1844–52), a compendium of orthodoxy produced through a collaborative effort of Cousin’s disciples with some participation and oversight by the maître. Its editor, Adolphe Franck, reserved for himself authorship of the article “Moi,” yet another indication of the utter centrality of that concept in the Cousinian worldview.[^43] Curiously enough, given Cousin’s loathing for the physiological reductionism prevalent in Paris medicine, it was the sixty-volume Dictionnaire des sciences médicales (1812–22) that provided the model for the philosophical dictionary. The former was regarded during the nineteenth century as an emblem of the boiled down, sum total of medical knowledge, as can be seen in the novel Madame Bovary (1857), where Flaubert’s narrator enumerates the contents of the consulting room of Charles Bovary, licensed officier de santé: “Volumes of the ‘Dictionary of Medical Science,’ uncut, but the binding rather the worse for the successive sales through which they had gone, occupied almost alone six shelves of a pinewood bookcase.”[^44] The Cousinian reference work bore a parallel title and a parallel representation of its collective authorship (“By a Society of Physicians and Surgeons” became “By a Society of Philosophy Professors”); it was even printed by the same firm.[^45]

To understand why the Cousinians chose to imitate the physicians in this way, it is useful to look at the anonymous “Authors’ Preface” to the philosophical dictionary. This document, in which, according to private correspondence, Cousin himself had a hand,[^46] betrayed a strong sense of embattlement. It alluded darkly to the “abundant self-interested hatreds [that] rise up against [philosophy]” and to the widespread allegations that “after three thousand years, [philosophy] can still do no more than haltingly address frivolous questions, being condemned on more serious matters to the most shameful and incorrigible confusion.” But, the Preface allowed, the future looked brighter. The publication of the first volume of the Dictionnaire was providing the professors with the occasion for announcing that the “science” [of philosophy] had finally manage[d] to constitute itself.”[^47] An odd announcement to be sure, in light of the fact that the tradition of philosophy in the West went back at least to Plato. The professors obviously meant the reconstitution of philosophy by Cousin under peculiarly nineteenth-century conditions, when the prevailing definition of science had changed and the materialist trends associated with medicine and sensationalist philosophy had threatened to subsume mental phenomena under the laws of biology and thus to put philosophy out of business altogether.[^48] The Dictionnaire was thus intended as a monument to the successful execution of that re-constitutive task. And however far their own epistemological commitments diverged from those of the prevailing school of medicine, the Cousinians were sufficiently savvy and opportunistic to deck out their Dictionnaire with all the formal trappings of the famous Dictionnaire des sciences médicales, thus tacitly asserting a full scientific parity between philosophy and medicine—a version of Cousin’s earlier statements that his brand of metaphysics was an observational science and that his psychology possessed the same degree of scientific certainty as physics (see Chapter 4).

### The Cousinian Textbook: Supplementing the Master

Max Weber’s The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism contains a suggestive case study in the elaboration and dissemination of a system of ideas. Outlining Calvin’s theology, Weber infers the deep anxiety that it would likely inspire in its sixteenth- and seventeenth-century adherents: for how could people who cared above all about the afterlife cope with the presumption that, by a secret and irrevocable decree, God had already sealed their eternal destiny? Weber notes that Calvin, supremely confident of his own divine election, never thought to offer his followers advice for handling the sense of helpless dread that would engulf so many of them. Instead, it fell to Calvinist ministers, who encountered the distressed parishioners face to face, to formulate that necessary, practical aspect of the doctrine. And hence it was to manuals of pastoral care that Weber turned to learn how Calvinist theology was amplified and nuanced to meet the challenges it posed for daily life—to ensure, in other words, the feasibility of its dissemination.[^49]

This model has relevance for Cousinianism as well. Although the so-called psychological method was, both historically and theoretically, the linchpin of his system, and although he depicted himself as extremely proficient in it, Cousin did little to specify how this indispensable skill was to be imparted to others. Such a lacuna was a weak spot in a system of thought designed for large-scale educational institutionalization. After all, the run of middle-class adolescent males could hardly be expected to possess native introspective tendencies. Furthermore, following the Revolution of 1830, Cousin withdrew from the classroom, assuming the increasingly managerial and bureaucratic role that so dismayed Caroline Angebert. Only in 1853, when the return of Bonapartism had relieved him of these responsibilities, would he even compose a general work, suitable for student use, synthesizing his philosophical principles.[^50] Nor did Maine de Biran, the unwitting progenitor of the Cousinian movement and a true virtuoso of the inner life, offer help in this regard. Nothing could have been more foreign to Biran’s fiercely individualistic spirit than the project of institutionalizating the introspective method: indeed, reviewing a bill on public instruction before the Chamber of Deputies in 1817, he confided in his journal that, unlike the Doctrinaires, he found government control of education a “true intellectual tyranny.”[^51]

Hence, during the critical period of the July Monarchy, it fell to Cousin’s disciples to figure out an effective pedagogy for the Cousinian philosophy and to use the genre of the textbook to make the practice of interior observation—or, alternatively, the fruits of that practice—accessible to the ordinary lycéen. What the manual of pastoral care was to Max Weber’s sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Calvinists, the student textbook was to the nineteenth-century Cousinian movement.

The Idéologues had also cultivated the textbook genre. If the short life span of the central schools curtailed the circulation of Destutt de Tracy’s intended textbook, the Elémens d’idéologie, the stylistic features of that work nonetheless expressed the group’s distinctive pedagogical outlook—that is, their refusal to use schooling to indoctrinate or catechize the population, and their insistence on training students for both self-reflexivity and intellectual autonomy. Instead of presenting his material in an unambiguous, laconically authoritative manner suitable for rote memorization, Destutt de Tracy emphasized process. On more than one occasion, he showed students how he had abandoned and improved upon his initial hypothesis through correcting his mode of reasoning.[^52] The Idéologue Laromiguière employed a similarly open-ended pedagogical style. As the published version of his course reveals, he invited questions and objections from his audience and composed whole lectures around them. “Gentlemen,” he told his students on one occasion, “it is not I who gives this course, or at least I don’t do it alone. Your reflections run ahead of mine; they carry me forward.”[^53]

With its celebrated linkage between psychology and ontology, Cousinianism aimed at producing self-reflexivity in the student while discouraging or, at least, severely restricting intellectual autonomy. As a result, Cousinian textbooks were more conventional instances of the genre, exuding matter-of-fact certainty.[^54] Institutional forces exerted pressure in the same direction. Since all young people aspiring to the baccalaureate under the July Monarchy had to pass an examination in Cousin’s philosophy—this was, after all, the brunt of the 1832 decree of the Royal Council of Public Instruction—a cottage industry in philosophy manuals rapidly sprang up. The superficiality of the early manuals led philosophy professors, concerned to prevent the degradation of their discipline, to take over the writing of these study guides from the hacks who had pioneered them and to aim their enriched contents at both students and teachers.[^55] Given the dread examination that loomed large over such textbooks, their authors, unlike Destutt de Tracy, obviously strove for simple, unambiguous clarity.

I will be looking here at a group of such textbooks, all pre-1848 products of Cousin’s former students-turned-philosophy-professors and each offering a slightly different variation on the basic Cousinian themes adumbated in the master’s oral teaching and his published writings. Two of these textbooks demonstrated particular staying power: Adolphe-Félix Gatien-Arnoult’s Programme d’un cours de philosophie was reprinted five times between 1830 and 1850; the much longer and more elaborate Manuel de philosophie, à l’usage des collèges, the joint effort of a trio of Cousinian disciples, Amédée Jacques, Jules Simon, and Emile Saisset, became something of a workhorse, going through nine printings between its initial publication in 1846 and 1883.[^56]

Taken together these textbooks indicate, more often by their awkward silence than by their overt comments, the extreme difficulty of teaching introspection. All of them rehearsed, in some form or other, the Cousinian dictum that introspection is the route to psychological knowledge. But only one textbook writer, Gatien-Arnoult, saw fit to address the nagging practical issue of just how introspective capacity was to be acquired. After listing the questions about the moi that Cousin’s curriculum required every student to answer, Gatien-Arnoult pronounced categorically, “There is but a single way to discover the true responses to these questions, interior observation.”[^57] Yet, as he revealed in a footnote, getting his young charges to grasp the “interior reality” (fait intérieur) was no simple matter. Leaving class one day in 1828, brooding on what had occurred there, he recognized a curious fact: that his students’ success at introspection was inversely proportional to the ordinariness and simplicity of the mental processes on which he bade them to reflect. He speculated that he might therefore elicit greater introspective prowess if he asked his students to reflect only on the extraordinary aspects of mental life, following the logic that “a pupil who mumbles when reading aloud should be given as reading material books printed in an unusual typeface or in a foreign language.”[^58] He did not, however, develop this point. He did, however, enumerate the many obstacles to introspection, especially for the novice, mentioning our instinctive and habitual propensity to train our attention outward, the fleeting nature of internal phenomena, and the poverty of our linguistic resources for describing them. By this device, Gatien-Arnoult apparently hoped to relieve his students’ sense of frustration and personal inadequacy in face of their assigned task. He also assured them that “constant labor” and a “strong will” would eventually overcome the obstacles and open the way to a continually rewarding “conquest” of the inner realm.[^59]

In addition to these tentative and disjointed suggestions about how to impart introspective skill to the average lycéen, Gatien-Arnoult provided a detailed account of what introspection was supposed to reveal. So, too, did the other textbook writers; indeed that account constituted the bulk of all these textbooks. Such straightforward disclosure of the results of the psychological “experiment” was, on the one hand, pedagogically necessary; even the most successful instance of student introspection could not be expected to stand on its own, without authoritative verification. On the other hand, disclosure made possible a kind of cheating. It encouraged the lazy and the obtuse simply to bypass the introspective moment, thus violating the sacrosanct principle that every student personally reconstruct the science of psychology for himself. At the same time, it offered an analogous shortcut to professors and textbook writers: how much easier to transmit secondhand the introspective discoveries of the master psychologists than to figure out how to initiate adolescent males into the mysteries of interior observation. It is in this light that we should probably interpret the suspiciously self-assured remark made by Antoine Charma when he was teaching his very first philosophy course. “I got through the psychology without a hitch,” he told Cousin.[^60] To judge from the textbook Charma wrote several years later, which frequently cited evidence gleaned by the self-observing consciousness, but neglected the mechanics of introspection, Charma taught psychology with ease because he gave his students the answers. He did not force them to turn inward to arrive at the answers on their own.[^61]

Some of the textbook writers took up a related aspect of introspection: the problem of whether introspective capacity was evenly distributed among the population. This problem had implications both for everyday pedagogical practice and for the perennial Cousinian themes of human difference and social hierarchy. Thus Charles Mallet, whose textbook began with a discussion of Cousin’s pregnant and ubiquitous distinction between spontaneity and reflection, mused, “If consciousness notifies us of everything that happens in the for intérieur, why are certain men so much more adept at recounting what transpires within them? That bright interior light that you call consciousness, is it brighter for some than for others?” Mallet responded to this rhetorical question by asserting the utter equality of the consciousness of everybody. As he saw it, distinctions entered the picture only in the processing of consciousness, a task that relied on the faculty of will and its derivative, attention:

> Now since men do not have the same force of will and consequently do not give the same degree of attention to what transpires within them, it follows that knowledge of internal phenomena is clearer and more complete for some than for others. Consciousness itself is the same for everyone but reflection is not, if we take reflection to mean the volontary act of the mind folding back on itself and concentrating its effort on those phenomena whose presence is attested by consciousness. Consciousness is fatal, reflection is free.[^62]

Mallet here repeated the position articulated by Cousin in his 1828 lectures, but with a slight shift of accent. For Cousin, reflection—the operation able to tease out the moi, or will, from the primitive synthesis of the elements of consciousness—was a type of intelligence; for Mallet, reflection was itself a manifestation of will. The divergence between these positions is small and quite possibly inconsequential: both men, after all, ended up offering a psychological justification for human hierarchy. But the divergence nonetheless points to areas of ambiguity and fluidity in Cousin’s doctrine and hence to the interpretive power implicitly vested in the textbook writers.

The exercise of that interpretive power proved more significant in the Manuel of Jacques, Simon, and Saisset. As sole author of the textbook’s section on psychology, Jacques, too, addressed the politically delicate issue of differences in introspective capacity. He first broached that issue in his discussion of will—the content of the moi and perhaps also (if one followed Mallet) the instrument for appropriating the moi. Did the will, he wondered, differ in quality in different human beings? Appearances were in this case deceiving, he warned. We were accustomed to speaking of “firmness of character as unequally distributed among the different individuals of the species,” and this turn of phrase usually led us to the conclusion that will, too, is unequally distributed. But, in fact, all men were endowed with an equal capacity for volition and that very equality, paradoxically, explained why some have firm characters and others weak ones. Although “[h]e who wills with force and tenacity what he has resolved passes for a man of character [while] he who wills weakly and is quickly discouraged is deemed a man lacking in will,” those commonplace assessments were false. Withdrawal from the struggle was itself proof of the vigorous independence of the will, “less well employed perhaps, but as perfect as that of the man who continued the struggle.” In contrast to Mallet, who postulated an equal luminescence of consciousness among men but an unequal will to undertake the difficulties of its interior observation, Jacques insisted that “men are equal only in will and hence they are absolutely (rigoureusement) equal. That equality, the only true kind, is also the only good kind and the only possible kind.”[^63]

Thus the perpetual problematic of Cousinian psychology—whether it would affirm a universal human nature or a hierarchical differentiation of people—seems to have been decided by Jacques in a fundamentally democratic fashion: if we are different, we are so by dint of the resolutions freely made by our equally powerful wills. While Jacques recognized that Nature did not create us with equivalent sensibilities (some are “exquisite” and others “dense”) or equivalent intellects (some are “lively” and others “slow”),[^64] these disparities in the two other faculties of consciousness did not impair our capacity to enjoy the exercise of our formally equivalent wills.

Jacques’ nascent democratic tendency came through again when he described the introspection that isolates and apprehends the will. He seemed to say—though he left this detail vague, perhaps deliberately and prudently so—that any human being is capable of such introspection and self-appropriation. Here is his description of that all-important mental act. It is the nearest thing to a step-by-step guide to introspection that he provided in his textbook, and he saved it for the very last pages of the section on psychology:

> It is only a matter of collecting oneself inside oneself and for an instant cutting oneself off from the tumult of the senses, brushing aside the false glimmers of the imagination that obscure that spirit of the truth that illuminates our interior. Whoever is capable of that effort will soon sense that the cloud hiding his own nature from himself has dissipated, and for the confused feeling he initially had about [his own nature] will be substituted by degrees an increasingly distinct feeling of the simplicity of what he calls the moi; and that feeling will ultimately take on all the persuasive force and all the clarity of a lively and luminous apperception. Thus he will have rediscovered by reflection the true sense of the word “I”[ . . . ] It only requires a little will and a moment of calm and silence. Don’t reason; look, and you will feel a simple and unified power live inside you [ . . . ][^65]

The political import of this passage turns on the meaning ascribed to the phrase “whoever is capable of that effort.” Jacques’ discussion of the equality of the will would seem to imply that everyone is technically capable, but that some people may freely choose to abstain from the activity of introspective self-appropriation that the passage identifies with reflection. Nor, apparently, will the group of abstainers be defined by their social-class position. For, unlike Mallet, Jacques did not reproduce in his textbook Cousin’s discussion of spontaneity as the modality of the people and reflection as that of the elite.

Subtly hinted at in the Manuel, Jacques’ particular political slant on Cousinian psychology was almost certainly invisible to the privileged students who used that book as a study guide. (“This being a purely elementary work,” the triumvirate of authors pledged in the foreword, “any possibly controversial material has been scrupulously eliminated.”)[^66] It would be broadcast clearly only during the Second Republic, in the aftermath of a highly public affaire. In the end, Jacques would provide the deconstructive reading of Cousin with respect to social class that Caroline Angbert had provided—decades earlier and in the sheltered context of a private correspondence—with respect to gender.[^67] Nevertheless, for all his incendiary potential, the Jacques of the 1846 Manuel must still be seen as one of the group of Cousinian disciples who dutifully attempted to train bourgeois male lycée students in Cousin’s technology of the self.

How successful they were in teaching introspection is, of course, impossible to assess with precision, any more than we can gauge the success rate in the comparable pedagogical endeavors of their religious forebears, the monks and confessors, or their twentieth-century successors, the psychoanalysts. One factor that may have conduced to their success was that they aimed lower than these other groups. They nurtured introspective capability and knowledge not as a way of life or a means to continually unfolding self-discovery, though they did seem to prize the verbal precision that it would likely lend to the educated man’s accounts of his psychic states.[^68] Rather they appealed to introspection on something more akin to a “one-time” basis. Once the adept had experienced firsthand the force of the free volitional activity contained in consciousness, and had identified it with his “self,” he had learned the indispensable, basic lesson. Presumably periodic reexperience would reinforce that lesson. But the manuals, geared to the statement of doctrine, did not emphasize repeated recourse to introspective practice.

Yet even if Cousinian introspection was not an ongoing process—and even if it is safe to assume that many lycéens failed to master it and instead memorized its supposed results—the certitude of both selfhood and membership in an elite that it provided lent it enormous cachet. Surely it is not accidental that the Cousinian philosopher Francisque Bouillier assured his students in 1844 that “psychological observation, replete with all its depths” would never spread from the elite to the multitude.[^69] And in his textbook even the democratically inclined Jacques held out to his readers the promise of social superiority, observing of the Cousinian philosophy generally that “it gives the mind those virile habits that render men capable and distinguished.”[^70]

### The Regiment

Ever the institution-builder, Cousin created at the grass-roots level a remarkably effective informal institution: the network of his former students, now inserted by his own hand in posts as philosophy professors all across France. One of his means for cementing his students’ postgraduate loyalty doubles as a major source of information about the network they constituted. The students kept in touch with Cousin by mail, writing him at more or less regular intervals over the course of years or even decades. Cousin in turn assiduously preserved their letters and then, at his death, left his personal archive to the Sorbonne. Since in their capacity as letter writers the students were often loquacious, and since Cousin did not save his side of the correspondence, the historian who consults this archive has the sense of eavesdropping on interminable chatter directed at a silent and powerful interlocutor.[^71] The students were doubtless giving a command performance. Although they rarely broached sexual matters, and then only with extreme delicacy,[^72] their verbosity on other topics may qualify as the effect of a Foucauldian-style incitement to discourse: a forced disclosure through which they constituted their subjective identities.[^73] In this case, those identities were the combined ones of philosophers, teachers, and disciples.

Textual evidence from a variety of sources indicates Cousin’s role as the initiator and architect of these inevitably asymmetric epistolary exchanges: it was he who insisted upon or at least strongly encouraged the correspondence. According to an undated manuscript by Jules Simon, Cousin’s “preferred followers were authorized to correspond with him.”[^74] A letter by Ernest Bersot to his family in 1844 points up the anxiety that accompanied writing to the maître, the uncomfortable sense that one’s epistolary offerings were being appraised and graded. From his teaching post in Dijon, Bersot happily reported the testimony of a reliable friend in Paris that “Monsieur Cousin has been very pleased with my letters and speaks of me in a friendly manner.”[^75] And the students’ letters to Cousin are voluble on the subject of their own, unspontaneous conditions of production. “I delayed writing to you, as you had requested me to do, about the Cours de philosophie that you wanted me to publicize at Bourges. . . .”[^76] “Since you promised to write me first, I was waiting for your letter in order to write to you myself.”[^77] “Today I take advantage of the permission that you so kindly gave me to write to you.”[^78]

At the end of a long and information-packed missive, one student even brought to the fore the radically equivocal status of the letters, the uneasy space that they occupied between private and official communications. Mentioning that he had fallen short of some of his pedagogical goals in his philosophy class in Rouen, Mallet said that he would prefer to discuss the matter face to face when he saw Cousin in Paris. He would wait until Easter, even though he knew he could unburden himself immediately in the epistolary medium. After all, he remarked, “the letters that I have the honor of writing you do not exactly have an official character.”[^79] What did Mallet mean by this cryptic observation? That the letters were, in fact, quasi-official and hence should not include potentially damaging information about his inadequacies as a state employee? That the letters could not be farther from official, and hence should avoid overly solemn, work-related issues? Perhaps Mallet himself was unsure, the ambiguity of his meaning reproducing the ambiguity of the “scene of writing” that Cousin had created.

Cousin’s strong shaping influence on the correspondence is seen in the fact that all of the letters touched on the same basic repertory of topics.

These topics may have been explicitly proposed or prescribed at the point at which the student left Paris to assume his first teaching post, or they may have been elicited by questions contained in Cousin’s own letters. Some of the standard topics concerned the student’s life situation: the headway he was making on the two required theses, one in Latin and the other in French; his meditations on his philosophical vocation (“I love philosophy because I strongly believe in it, and I am firmly resolved always to serve it.”[^80] “I would accept an administrative position only if it left me sufficient leisure for my philosophical work, which has become a need for me”[^81]); his attitude toward his teaching post and, almost always, his desire for career advancement; his decision to marry, or not to marry. Other topics concerned the general progress of the Cousinian movement: the precise content of the courses the student was teaching, so that Cousin could be assured that all the critical points were being touched; the enrollment (Gatien-Arnoult triumphantly announced an audience of 500 or 600, “crammed on the benches or perched on the windows,” in a room seating only 400, Charma crowed that “our psychological studies” had drawn twice as many students as the local Law Faculty, and Bouillier, who started out with a class of 200, proudly reported at the end of the academic year, “Not only did my audience not abandon me, but it has grown”);[^82] the relations of the student with the intellectuals and clergy in the town, and especially the sentiments expressed by both those groups toward Cousin’s philosophy; the coverage Cousin received in the local press. With respect to this second set of topics, Cousin used his former students like the bureaucratic appointees they were. Scattered around the country in the venues predetermined by the structure of the French educational administration, they served as his eyes and ears in the provinces, gathering data and funneling it back to the center, managing public opinion, furthering Cousin’s agenda, and defending him from attack. “Cousin is unknown in the departments,” the Gazette des écoles had observed shortly after Cousin’s 1830 appointment to the Royal Council of Public Instruction.[^83] It was one of the jobs of the regiment to render that dictum obsolete.

The modes of address in these letters were, like the topics included in their contents, highly ritualized. “Monsieur” indicated a relationship with Cousin at the more distant and formal end of the spectrum. A more elaborate form of it, “M. le Conseiller” or “M. le Ministre,” signaled a letter that was a vehicle for official business rather than an occasion for chitchat. “Mon cher maître” was the intimate mode of address. Students often made the transition from “Monsieur” to “Mon cher maître” (or the slightly less familiar “Mon illustre maître”) when they had crossed some psychological barrier, specified or unspecified. The reverse transition was ominous, a reliable sign of a falling out.

The letters show the uniformly strong tendency of the former students to perceive themselves as belonging to a collectivity. Under a variety of names, many of them metaphorical, they refer proudly to the group, headed by Cousin, which claims them as its members. The military term “regiment,” which I have used as the title of this section and by which the group was often known in the outside world,[^84] was apparently of Cousin’s own coinage. Thus Ernest Bersot informed his family in 1837 that he had passed his major examination with Monsieur Cousin who, at the end of a long and occasionally “terrifying” interrogation, “enrolled me in his regiment.”[^85] In a remarkably frank letter to Royer-Collard earlier that decade, Cousin not only indicated the ease and regularity with which he used the term “regiment” to describe the collective body of his students and clients but also laid down one of the ground rules of that informal organization. Responding to Royer-Collard’s inquiry about the employment situation of a former student, he indicated that he had some time ago moved the young man from Nîmes to Grenoble (“an improvement in his situation”) and had just authorized a second transfer to Angers, where he would be closer to Royer-Collard. But Orléans was out of the question, having been earmarked for another, particularly worthy “young Doctor” whose “sacrifice” to Royer-Collard’s student would have been “supremely unjust.” As devoted to Royer-Collard as Cousin was, there were limits to what he would do for his mentor’s protégés—a point that he spelled out so explicitly that it deserves to be quoted verbatim.

> Since [this particular student] is under your patronage, invite him to do honor to [that status] by distinguishing himself from his classmates through his labors. For I take pains to preserve in my regiment a competition (émulation) founded on the conviction that merit always determines advancement.[^86]

Despite Cousin’s apparent preference for “regiment,” his students employed that term rather infrequently in their correspondence with him. “Service in your regiment is perilous, especially when one has earned his stripes from you,” Ernest Bersot concluded a letter from Bordeaux in 1842.[^87] But other military references abounded. Francis Riaux assured Cousin from Rennes that, despite the geographical distance that separated them, he need fear no lapse in the younger man’s fidelity: a “soldier feels his courage and force intensify when he knows that his general’s eyes are on him.” Three years later he described himself as a “grateful and loyal soldier” and depicted the Cousinian collectivity with quiet passion as “our cause,” an expression also used by other students and by Cousin himself.[^88] He sometimes fused the military with the literary metaphor, as when he took consolation in belonging to “that little galaxy [pléaide—a term used for the greatest of the French Renaissance poets] of young professors arrayed in the shadow of your flag.”[^89] The religious metaphor was also extensively mined. To Bersot, the group could be aptly described as Cousin’s “flock.”[^90] Reminding Cousin that his discipleship dated back to 1818, Laurent Delcasso spoke of “our old cult”[^91]—a phrase that, taken out of context, could easily pass for a lapsed Catholic’s allusion to Catholicism. But Delcasso obviously meant it to refer to the Cousinian philosophy, whose foundations were laid in 1815–18, and to the appeal that it exercised among its faithful as a substitute religion.

The solidarity of the group was also perceived by outsiders. When, beset by rational doubt, Ernest Renan left the Saint-Sulpice seminary in 1845 after nine years’ total immersion in Catholicism, many Paris intellectuals were eager to aid his reorientation to secular culture. Cousin made welcoming gestures, but Renan nonetheless regarded the philosopher as fundamentally inaccessible: “Monsieur Cousin. . . . was too surrounded by disciples for me to attempt to elbow my way through that crowd, tightly bound together by the words of the master.”[^92]

Although the students’ letters to Cousin are far from relaxed in style, they are not always cramped or stilted. Venting anger at Cousin, while a rare occurrence, was apparently permissible and indicates the emotionally intense, hothouse atmosphere that characterized this circle—at least during the 1840s, when Cousin’s political and bureaucratic power was at its peak. At the moment of an emotional outburst, the student letter writers seem to have abandoned self-censorship. Thus Jules Barni could not “get over [his] astonishment” at the harsh words that Cousin had addressed to him in front of “a third party” at what was supposed to be a pleasurable evening in the country in July 1846. “Even if your reproaches had had some foundation, which I refuse to accept, you should have delivered them at another moment and in a different tone.” For the “man of conscience” he pretended to be, Cousin had treated him “outrageously.” To be sure, Barni did not maintain the upper hand throughout this angry letter; his avowal of his suffering and of his sense of wounded dignity could be read as an appropriately palliative acknowledgment of his inferior status vis-à-vis Cousin. In any case, Barni’s outburst seems to have been accepted by Cousin and integrated into their continuing patron-client relationship. Within twenty-four hours Cousin had dashed off a brief note to Barni, and the latter replied, regretting what he had said while under the sway of “an emotion I could not vanquish” and thanking Cousin for having relieved his heart of the oppressive weight of resentment.[^93]

The outburst of Antoine Charma, on the other hand, could not be contained within the structure of Cousinian patron-clientage and was the prelude to a break with Cousin. For reasons that the correspondence does not clearly specify, Charma felt himself spurned and unappreciated by Cousin. “I could have been your favorite disciple . . . Plato would have found a Phaedo in me! Will I remain to the end lost in the crowd of your admirers, or is my period of trial finally over?”[^94] The issue seems to have been Charma’s desire to leave his teaching post at the Faculty of Letters in Caen, about whose lax academic standards he had earlier complained, for something more stimulating and lucrative in Paris.[^95] Although his boredom in Caen was temporarily relieved by the 1836 trial there of the patricide Pierre Rivière[^96]—an event made known in our own era by Michel Foucault’s book[^97]—he filled his letters to Cousin with grievances about life in Normandy. He spoke of his seven long years of exile, of the “too marked disparity between the theater [presumably the Faculty of Caen] and the actor [himself],” of the impossibility of providing for two children and a young wife on a provincial salary so low that he had been unable to save a single sou.[^98] The letters leading up to the outburst reveal a long-simmering tension between teacher and student. One ends with an extravagant and anxious expression of attachment: “Permit me, Sir, to tell you in closing that if my letters (as your latest response has made me fear) distort me to the point of not betraying in every line my intense desire to satisfy you—you who, in truth, gave birth to my moral life—those letters lie disgracefully and I disown them.”[^99] The next letter pleads ill health as the reason for Charma’s decision not to make his usual summer visit to Paris and adds with unintended sarcasm, “The most costly aspect of this resolution is the loss of the several minutes of time that you are so kind to give me each year.”[^100]

But Charma may have strained the already frayed relationship beyond the breaking point when he implicitly accused Cousin of rationalist detachment and insensitivity to human feelings, bidding him to “descend from the heights of your philosophical throne into the hardly scholarly secrets of my inner self (mon intérieur).”[^101] Since, whatever his construction of the term, Cousin typically depicted himself as a virtuoso of the intérieur, this oblique attack on his professional legitimacy may have struck him as intolerable. In any event, Charma did not write his old patron again for nearly six years, and then only after Cousin had deputized another former student, Adolphe Franck, to extend the olive branch.[^102] The relationship between Charma and Cousin then resumed, less intense but also less tortured and more genuinely affectionate than before. Though he never got his longed-for release from the obscurity of Caen, Charma began to address Cousin as his “très-cher maître.”[^103]

While still a student in Paris, Paul Janet began his correspondence with Cousin in order to apologize for an angry outburst:

> Please be so kind as to inform me of your intentions with regard to me and if I ought to construe narrowly the resolve that you expressed last night. If the sole cause of that resolve was the uncontrolled and violent words that I made the mistake of uttering, please accept on that point all my apologies. I strongly regret having failed in what I owe you, and I would be sorry if the inflamed words of a young man ruptured a relation at once so useful and so honorable to me.

The letter seems to have appeased Cousin, for Janet embarked upon a particularly long and eminent career as a representative of the Cousinian school. His next letter, written when he was about to leave Paris to take up a provincial post, gracefully alludes to their recurrent interpersonal difficulties. (“I would have wanted to have a natural disposition that would permit me to satisfy you more constantly.”) However, once Janet was on his own and out of sight, peace seems to have reigned between patron and client.[^104]

The correspondence also sheds light on the place of marriage in the lives of this first generation of professional, state-employed philosophers. Cousin himself never married and, although his sexual liaison with the writer Louise Colet produced a journalistic scandal in Paris in 1840,[^105] his students seem to have believed, or more likely pretended to believe, that carnal passion was unknown to him. A chapter titillatingly called “The Loves” in Jules Simon’s 1887 biography of the maître describes only the sketches of seventeenth-century women to which Cousin devoted his years of retirement. That chapter and the whole biography end with a dictum as arresting as it is false: “Into his life no woman enters—at least, no living woman; in his heart and in his talent this great lacuna remains.”[^106]

Cousin’s bachelorhood must have lent his leadership a priestly aura. Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire’s 1895 biography declares that Cousin regretted this status, regarding the failure to marry as fundamentally antisocial behavior, and that he consequently recommended marriage to all who sought his advice.[^107] But Cousin’s correspondence with his former students reveals a more complicated story, as one might expect of a mentor who tended so forcefully to affirm his own personal example. Cousin was deeply ambivalent about the place of marriage in the philosophical life. So pronounced was his irresolution that he was capable of describing prolonged bachelorhood as producing “a painful void in the soul” and, in the immediately following sentences, to declare that most men lacked the “firmness of heart” that would prevent “family interests” from causing them to “falter in the exercise of [their] duties as philosophers and as citizens” and, even more stridently, that “Marriage has weakened the Université while celibacy has been a source of strength for the Church.”[^108]

Cousin’s position on the marriage of his students seems to have been a function of his own plans for the particular student, how he intended to deploy him in the grand regimental strategy for the propagation of philosophy. He had, it would appear from the letters, no qualms at all about the marriage of Francisque Bouillier, a disciple stationed in Lyon. In January 1848, Bouillier had mentioned a rich uncle who had recently vowed to remain single until the end of his days; he would leave his entire fortune to his two nephews, in addition to providing a gift of 60,000 francs to each on his wedding day. The good news had immediately turned Bouillier’s thoughts to marriage and to the salutary effect that an advantageous match would have on the political career that, already a municipal councilor in Lyon, he envisioned for himself.[^109] Cousin apparently could not contain his curiosity about his student’s marital aspirations, for some two months later Bouillier wrote to him, “You’ve expressed so much interest that I feel obliged to announce my coming marriage. I am already engaged. . . .” His betrothed was twenty years old and had an aristocratic particle in her name. “It is a rather fine marriage,” Bouillier opined, “with respect to the person, the family, and the fortune.”[^110] Soon he was taking vacations on the landed property of his wife’s grandmother and, coining a memorable phrase, he epitomized his lifestyle there as one in which he divided his time “between Cartesianism and hunting.”[^111] Bouillier’s marriage was clearly a vehicle for his social and possibly political advancement, enhancing his influence as a proponent of Cousinianism; and if for no other reason Cousin seems to have approved of it.[^112]

[To view this image, refer to the print version of this title.]

Figure 4: The Maître. This portrait of Victor Cousin, originally attributed to the photographer Nadar but now believed to be the work of Gustave Le Gray, dates from 1854–1859, when the maître was in his sixties—older than in the period covered in detail by this book. Cousin’s grave countenance accords well with the concept of the self he promulgated, although here it may convey his suspicion of the time-consuming photographic process that was fixing his image for posterity. His slightly disheveled look (note his wrinkled clothing and the bit of patterned fabric peeking out between his vest and trousers) befits his status as an aging bachelor. (The J. Paul Getty Museum, Los Angeles © The J. Paul Getty Museum)

However, the case of Vacherot shows that, where the marriage of former students was concerned, Cousin had more than one string to his bow. He felt, in short, free to meddle. In an emotional letter that went straight to the point, Vacherot began, “I have suffered a great deal and I will continue to suffer for a long time still from the service you have rendered me; yet my reason still acknowledges that service and is deeply grateful to you for it.” Apparently Cousin had talked Vacherot out of getting married or, at least, had persuaded him to refrain from doing so in the immediate future.

> I ought not think of marrying right now. I have as yet done nowhere near enough for the science to which I belong entirely. You had real grounds for doubting my philosophical vocation, seeing me thus inclined to lull myself prematurely in the bosom of family life. But I hope to prove to you that even if philosophy is not my soul’s only need, it will always be its premier need.[^113]

Vacherot later reversed his principled decision to remain single, impressed by the continued devotion of his jilted fiancée and by her parents’ generous promise to aid him in discharging his obligations to his own family. But at the moment of reversal, he again emphasized how heavily Cousin’s opinion had influenced his earlier resolution to break off the engagement.

> Here is my position. Eight months ago I renounced a marriage advantageous in every respect. I did so not because I believe marriage irreconcilable with the functions of the sacred philosophical calling (sacerdoce philosophique) but only because I feared the loss of your trust.[^114]

He even tried in another letter to persuade Cousin that his very desire to marry was evidence of the strength of his philosophical vocation. “I have never liked le monde [the world of polite sociability], and that is why I sense that marriage is necessary in my case. I want to live with Philosophy as my goal and have recourse to family affection to refresh and distract me.”[^115]

As one attempts to decipher Vacherot’s letters, always hampered by the absence of Cousin’s, it appears that Cousin had tied Vacherot’s proof of his so-called philosophical vocation to his willingness to leave a teaching post in the familiar environment of Versailles (where both his family and fiancée lived) for a far more difficult one at a collège in the intellectual backwater of Caen. There he would be perpetually on the front lines, attempting to persuade hostile Catholic parents that Cousinian philosophy was good for their children. He had, in other words, to be willing to sacrifice his personal happiness for the good of the movement. But whatever the details of Vacherot’s case, one fact is clear: Cousin was fully capable of invoking the quasi-priestly ideal of vocation (sacerdoce) as an argument against the marriage of a professor of Cousinian philosophy.

And indeed the correspondence reveals a distinctly ascetic streak in the culture of Cousin’s regiment, the kind of tendency that would, after all, make reference to the philosophical calling an effective rhetorical strategy. Vacherot, for example, noted that he tried hard to “spark a vocation” in appropriate students, not only because it was his duty to do so but because it gave him an “ineffable happiness.” He furthermore described the student with vocational potential as one “who puts to the service of his philosophical studies an impartial mind and especially a pure heart.”[^116] He also recounted instructing his charges in Normandy that happiness was not tantamount to pleasure. “I have wiped out the egoistic principle from the moral law. . . . What is most difficult to transmit to the minds and hearts of our young people is the conviction that no one has the right to complain of the distribution of rewards and punishments on this earth, and that happiness (but not pleasure) is the lot of every virtuous man.”[^117] Newly stationed in Tours as a young philosophy professor, Vapereau reported that he “mingled in society only as much as was necessary to avoid being treated as a misanthrope.” He attributed his unworldly, ascetic habits to Cousin. “My thought and my feelings have a higher goal, and I owe to my education, and to the influence that you spread about you, that I prefer the satisfactions of study to a frivolous vanity.”[^118]

An aspect of this asceticism was the widely shared belief that great shows of emotion—including the occasional angry outbursts that Cousin seems to have both provoked and selectively tolerated—were self-indulgent, that rationality ought to contain emotion. Thus, after sharing with Cousin his complicated feelings about marriage, Vacherot began his next letter with an apology. Ever since Cousin had honored him with admission into his “philosophical intimacy,” the younger man had, at least when “constrained by necessity,” also confided to him about “personal matters.” He was now contrite: “I know very well that you have the right to expect something else entirely from a philosophy professor.”[^119] The same ethos of containment of unruly passion by rationality can be seen in Mallet’s analysis of the suicide of a fellow student, Bach. In a discursive move reminiscent of the eighteenth century, Mallet finds the source of Bach’s tragedy in an overactive imagination. “There is a letter in which he speaks of an interview he had with you, Sir, around the middle of August. Bach’s imagination was so quick and far-reaching that he stretched the meaning of your promises to cover things they couldn’t possibly have included. That’s what ruined him.” We know from Mallet’s comments earlier in the same letter exactly what imagination connotes to him. Bemoaning the relatively little “aptitude for philosophical studies” that he has found among his students in Rouen, he observes that most of them are “no more than sixteen or seventeen, still at an age more favorable to the exercise of the imagination, than to that of reflection and reason.”[^120]

The correspondence also provides vivid accounts of the sometimes brutal conflict that broke out between the local clergy and the young Cousinian professoriate newly arrived from Paris. These accounts make clear both the institutional function of the regiment to disseminate Cousinianism in the provinces and the extreme discomfort entailed for the loyal soldiers by the lopsided way that Cousin occupied his position of middlingness. Cousin confronted his enemies to the left—those who reduced mind to matter, tolerated psychological fragmentation, and supported political and social democracy—head-on and without apology. But he attempted to appease his already powerful clerical enemies to the right, hoping to persuade them that there was nothing in his philosophy fundamentally inimical to Catholicism. He moreover enrolled his former students in this work of appeasement. Thus the Cousin disciple Emile Saisset wrote a pair of articles in the Revue des deux mondes in the mid-1840s arguing that the intelligentsia should studiously avoid anticlericalism and embrace the representation of Cousinianism as a “conciliatory spiritualism” capable of harmonizing philosophy and Catholicism.[^121] As the student correspondence reveals, the daily, face-to-face labor of persuading influential Catholics that Cousinianism posed no threat fell to the new graduates whom the maître had assigned to the provinces.

The otherwise put-upon Vacherot offers a vignette of himself engaged in this labor in Caen in 1836, duly uttering doublespeak. The superior of the local seminary has paid him a call, apparently for the purpose of discussing Cousin’s philosophy. He tells the young man that he finds Cousin’s system “admirable” insofar as it stays within its proper sphere, aloof from matters of religion. Such separation is, in his view, the key to peace between religion and philosophy: “Each in its own house,” and war can no more break out between them than between religion and physics. Called upon to reply, Vacherot becomes mealy-mouthed. He neither “accepts nor refuses [the] compromise settlement” proposed by his visitor but instead changes the subject, a strategy of evasion that he characterizes as “remaining faithful to the fatherly advice that you [Cousin] gave me.” It is not that Vacherot is intellectually undecided about the matter at hand; rather, following Cousin’s own views (“this flag of independence that you have planted in the French philosophical community”), he abhors the cleric’s position: “Science cannot accept such a compromise settlement without mutilating itself by its own hand . . .” Vacherot devises a neat formula to sum up his complex social performance: “I said nothing that I didn’t believe to be true; but I didn’t say everything that I believe to be true.” Both pride and shame seem to inhere in his account of the episode. He has obediently followed Cousin’s bidding, but he has also manifested a calculated disingenuousness.[^122]

If Vacherot experienced vague moral unease at the mediating role foisted upon him by Cousin, Ernest Bersot’s suffering was more intense.[^123]

The young philosopher was initially delighted with his appointment to Bordeaux in autumn 1840, recognizing that in bestowing it upon him Cousin had violated his basic principle, identical to that of the Old Regime state bureaucracy, of not placing functionaries in the geographical regions where they had familial roots. He fully knew “what gratitude you expect of me” for such bounty, and he regretted not having requested from his patron pre-departure “instructions for comporting myself in the city.” He soon announced to his students that he would “profess eclecticism”—a risky avowal, since this was a region in France in which people quipped that “Catholic doesn’t rhyme with eclectic” and in which they knew little about Cousin’s doctrine except that it was subversive: “When they don’t laugh at it, they put it on the Index.” By November Bersot described his “position in the city,” by which he meant his reception by the clergy, as a difficult one. The archbishop “and his party” regretted that, unlike his “devout” predecessor, Bersot was “simply religious” and was also “bringing your philosophy into the diocese.” Cousin had apparently prepared his disciples for such sticky situations, for Bersot pledged, “If I am attacked, I will not reply, following your counsel.” Happily and not unexpectedly, his relations with state appointees at the level of the department were smoother: “I spent the evening at the home of the Prefect, who lavishly praised your administration [as minister of public instruction, a post Cousin had lost just the month before].”[^124]

Bersot apparently stayed out of trouble for more than a year. However, in March 1842, perhaps lulled into a false sense of security, he called attention to himself by writing two articles criticizing the liberal Catholic Lacordaire, then preaching at the cathedral in Bordeaux, for dismissing philosophy as powerless and irrelevant.[^125] The clerical machinery now began to intrude on Bersot’s life in earnest.

> The Rector [of the Faculty of Letters] has stopped greeting me, and the day of the college holiday the assistant chaplain . . . delivered in front of the rector, the archbishop, the professors, the pupils and myself a sermon against philosophy in which I was personally heckled in such a scandalous manner that all the pupils turned around to look at me. His gentlest words were, “Reply obscure metaphysicians, frivolous psychologists, futile thinkers.”

Still, a petition demanding Bersot’s revocation from his post that was circulated among the parents of his pupils (presumably by his clerical enemies) received insufficient support and never saw the light of day. “I have not lost a single pupil, and they are all devoted to me.”[^126]

Two days later, however, Bersot began his letter with a cry for help (“If you abandon your protection of me, soon—perhaps in a few days—I will no longer belong to the Université”) and proceeded to give Cousin a detailed account of the “incredible” events that had just transpired. His pupils were scheduled for their Easter examinations, ordinarily given by a state bureaucratic official, the inspector of the Academy, as the local unit of the state’s educational administration was called. Departing from standard practice, the rector asked that the pupils be examined by a professor of the Faculty—in fact, by none other than Bersot’s “devout” predecessor, who had been supplied beforehand with a detailed syllabus of Bersot’s course. In the presence of the rector and the headmaster, this Professor Ladévi-Roche questioned the pupils about two points in the syllabus that he had earmarked as seditious: the theory that language was of human rather than divine origin and the existence of a faculty of will also called the force motrice. In their responses, the pupils dutifully presented Bersot’s views on the topics at hand, causing the rector and headmaster to indicate “their repulsion for my doctrines by their shrugs of the shoulders and signs of impatience.” When Ladévi-Roche presented his own opinions, the same two authority figures nodded and exclaimed with pleasure. An ugly scenario at best: Bersot submitted to official scrutiny through the medium of his pupils and in his pupils’ presence. The examination culminated in the rector’s tirade against the force motrice.

> Then the Rector, furious, cried out, “I must protest publicly and energetically against such pernicious doctrines. What we have here is atheism. What is this force motrice, this material soul? It is a newfangled power that may or may not obey the orders of the will. When I plunge a dagger into a man’s heart, it is not I who does the plunging, it is the force motrice; I’m not responsible, it is. Neither crimes nor virtues exist any longer. It is a doctrine of pure materialism.”

By following Cousin’s advice about self-control under pressure, Bersot effectively got the last word. When the rector turned toward him, awaiting his response, “I was the master of myself (maître de moi) and replied calmly, ‘Sir, I will give my pupils an example of respect and obedience by being silent.’”[^127]

In these tense circumstances, Bersot continued to be maître de moi (a term he seems to have favored, perhaps because of its distinctly Cousinian ring). But the tension had produced what he recognized as psychosomatic symptoms:

> I am very nervous, very irritable, and my body is taking its revenge. That same evening [after another confrontation with the Rector], I had a fever; M. Bazin [his friend the zoology professor] put me to bed; I fought it for several days and finally last Tuesday decided it was necessary to find someone to take over my class temporarily; it was a true malady of nerves.”[^128]

Cousin protected his outspoken client. When, at the rector’s insistence, the minister of public instruction was called in to mediate the conflict, Bersot remained secure in his post. The state inspectors who evaluated his teaching later that spring found in his favor and at the same time indicated to him that they were firmly under Cousin’s thumb. As Bersot reported gratefully to Cousin, “Instead of the severe admonition with which I had been publicly threatened, I found benevolence, minds already turned by you in my favor.[^129] But neither had Cousin given Bersot carte blanche. In a private letter whose confidentiality he underscored, he admonished Bersot to withdraw from the debate over Lacordaire, indeed always to take pains to represent himself publicly as absolute in his respect for religion. Thus Cousin’s desire to conciliate the clergy not only produced psychosomatic ailments in Bersot but necessitated that the younger man curtail his freedom of expression.[^130]

Although Bersot’s trials were particularly flamboyant, he was not alone among Cousin’s soldiers in receiving unkind treatment from the local clergy. Jules Simon reported from Caen “a sort of conspiracy on the part of the clergy to prevent my marriage, and you will be sad to hear that it is my status as a pupil of Monsieur Cousin that has rendered me suspect to these gentlemen.”[^131] Like Bersot in Bordeaux, Bouillier in Lyon immediately announced his affiliations. “I was at once proud and moderate, as you recommended. I emphasized eclecticism, the Ecole normale, [apparently virtually synonymous with eclecticism] and the independence of human reason.” True to his expectations, he was soon attacked in the legitimist press, especially after he expressed the opinion that “Spinoza was not an atheist and was even an extremely honorable man.” In Bouillier’s case, it was the political right, rather than the clergy, that came forth to torment him, although the grounds for criticism were the same. He mentioned some of the pamphlets newly circulating in Lyon: “One of them accuses you in bold letters of having taught Jouffroy not to believe in God; in another a criminal making a confession admits that reading your books led him to murder his benefactor, etc.” Bouillier’s relationship with the local clergy was, by contrast, cordial if intrinsically unstable. “I am on good terms with abbé Noirot, thanks to the questions that we have put aside and tacitly agreed not to speak about. I nonetheless suspect that he wasn’t pleased by everything I said in my inaugural lecture.”[^132]

As the copious ethnographic detail cited in this section has shown, the members of Cousin’s regiment ended up embracing Cousinianism not merely as an intellectual doctrine but as a way of life, one with its own customs, rituals, value system, career trajectory, and automatic set of friends and enemies. Grafted onto the formal institution of the Université, this highly elaborated informal network helped provide the infrastructure for Cousinian hegemony.

### Internalizing the Cousinian Self (1): Men

In making the claim that the Cousinian movement defined and inculcated the nineteenth-century French bourgeois self, it would be gratifying to be able to cite numerous first-person testimonials to the experience of self-discovery under the aegis of Cousinian pedagogy. But the young bourgeois men for whom that pedagogy was designed have not, apparently, obliged the historian in this regard. Their virtual silence, rather than undercutting my claim, probably indicates a certain redundancy of that pedagogy where they were concerned: they had not, to be sure, previously possessed a technical language to articulate their selfhood, but the conception of themselves as inherently active, willful beings would have come as no surprise. In their case, training in Cousinian psychology confirmed a truth already implicit in their social position; introspective knowledge solidified and shaped a preexisting, informal sense of self rather than measurably transforming them.

What the early nineteenth-century beneficiaries of Cousinian instruction have left behind for the historian are some of their school examinations and compositions. Probably because the Restoration education ministry was closely monitoring philosophy instruction at the Ecole normale supérieure—it would decide to close that headstrong institution between 1822 and 1828—the Archives Nationales contain a full set of graded examination papers from the year 1820.[^133] The date places these papers at the end of the foundational period of Cousinian philosophy, before it had been disseminated throughout France but when it was already firmly entrenched on the Rue d’Ulm. The students sitting for this particular examination were queried about the fundamental tenets of philosophical dualism: “What are the foundations of the belief that there exist not only an indefinite number of substances but also substances of different natures? How are we led to recognize that we are ourselves composed of two distinct substances, one material and the other immaterial, and what are the essential characteristics of these substances?” By their diversity of approach, the responses to these questions indicated that the students were not simply repeating formulae supplied by their professors but that they had to some degree integrated Cousinian philosophy into their own mental frameworks. They could pick and choose among its elements. They could speak Cousinian.

One student, the recipient of the highest grade, answered the question by offering a macrocosm-microcosm analogy and casting himself as the active, very impressionable investigator of both worlds. After surveying the material bodies that constituted the larger world and inferring from their order and regularity the existence of a divine spiritual substance, he turned his attention to the microcosm, the individual human being. In his excited involvement in this exercise, he even erred grammatically by switching from the first-person plural to the first-person singular midway through the argument:

> The same phenomenon that astonishes us in the universe and shows us an immaterial substance—one, intelligent, and volitional—animating this great whole and lending it in some way a more noble and majestic life, strikes us again when we return our gaze to ourselves. We first see our body, which lives only the ordinary life, which is born, develops and declines like other beings. But I hasten to perceive that, like the universe, I am double. My body gets weak and demands food, and I refuse it. Time and again I make light of its needs and its pains. I examine this strange part of myself that so often struggles against what I believe myself to be entirely; I soon perceive that it [the strange part] is everything and that my body is almost nothing. I pursue my research, and this is what I discover. . .

The student tells us little about how he pursued his research; he does not, in other words, describe an introspective process. But he does say that, having nearly fallen himself into the trap of overestimating the importance of human corporeality, he can now understand the foibles of the “philosophers of the last century [who] could, by taking activity away from thought, reduce man to a sensitive being.” And he concludes his essay with a flourish that makes use of a bevy of Cousinian keywords: “Unity, Simplicity, Identity, Liberty—all those ideas are resolved into that of Personality. And there you have it: the essential characteristics of the substance of the human moi.”[^134]

The less fluent, third-ranking student took a completely different approach, stressing the relationship of the material and immaterial substances to the different stages of the human life cycle. “The child thinks only of what he sees around himself; he exercises his powers of observation only on the external world.” But once he becomes a man, this need to observe turns him in a “new and more noble” direction. His observation

> takes another route and folds back entirely upon itself internally in order to show him to himself for what he is. He no longer sees but he feels, and as he feels only because there is something that he can feel, he concludes that there exists within him a second substance, of a nature different from the first, capable all by itself of movement—that is, immaterial—and whose existence is as well-proven as that of his body.

Unlike the first student, then, this one treated the question as an invitation to describe, as best he could, the elusive process of introspection.[^135]

The second-ranking student took yet another tack, introducing into his examination paper a Romantically tinged reminiscence—a stylistic gesture that might have been more typical for French philosophy students in 1820 than it was during the July Monarchy. He began by invoking an “autumn day when I was wandering in the country plunged into my customary reveries.” Nevertheless, his unfocused, Rousseauean dreaminess quickly gave way to the acute rationalism prized by the Cousinian school. Coming upon a peasant plowing the fields, he engaged him in conversation and made the classic Cousinian discovery about the lower orders: “I soon saw that he was not lacking in good sense (bon sens).” This realization inspired in him the desire, as he put it in a mixture of inductive and deductive vocabulary that well-expressed the Cousinian ethos, “to conduct an experiment in metaphysics on him.”

> “Do you believe,” I say to him, pointing to the stone that marks the limits of his field, “do you believe that stone exists?” “Why, yes, I believe that.” “But how do you know that it exists?” “Because I see it.” “Couldn’t you be mistaken?” My man thinks a few moments while rubbing his brow. “I am no more mistaken than I am when I believe that I exist.” “You also believe that you exist then?” “Good Lord, yes! I’ve never doubted it, nor has my priest. I feel it, that’s all.” “But,” I continued, “do you exist in the same way the stone does?” “Well, I have a body and a soul. My body is made of matter. My soul . . .” He hesitated and I continued to interrogate him. “My soul,” he added, “is how I sense that all this exists.” “Your soul is not made of matter then?” “No.” “Then what is it?” “I don’t know. But I sense that it is not like that stone nor like my body.” “You are right,” I tell him. I take my leave and, after a few paces, turn my head and see my laborer looking pensive. But soon I hear him whistling as he goes back to his furrows.

As the student sums up this excruciatingly condescending encounter: “Thus all men, even the most ignorant, believe in the existence of body and soul. It is only the philosopher who doubts and who seeks to delude himself about the beliefs held in common by humanity as a whole.”[^136]

This examination paper is a particularly telling historical document. It shows how Cousinianism linked philosophical dualism to a particular set of social attitudes, and it suggests how readily students grasped and internalized that linkage. In the rough-hewn, good-tempered, churchgoing, and eminently sensible peasant who submits to his questioning, the philosophy student has created a stereotype of the man of the people: a gracious subordinate of the man equipped with a lycée education and a natural ally of Cousinianism. The villain of the piece is the “philosopher,” which in 1820 still meant the Enlightenment philosophe espousing sensationalism. The student takes as given that the Cousinian insistence on self as spiritual substance entails an entirely patronizing bonhomie toward the lower classes.

Some of these same social attitudes come through in the essay of the fourth-ranking student. That essay ends with a description of the moi that, although couched in abstract philosophical vocabulary, speaks passionately, almost brutally, about hierarchies of power and their justification. The rulership inherent in selfhood is this student’s theme:

> I name “self” (moi) that force that matter obeys, a force about which matter can do nothing. I do not know its nature, but I sense that it is always acting, while matter is lifeless if that force does not animate it. I sense that the one is always producing, while the other, sterile by nature, can only passively receive either impressions from outside or commandments from that other substance which, in its liberty, obeys only itself or a power that it chooses to recognize.[^137]

An 1833 composition by Emile Saisset, then a normalien, that Cousin preserved among his own papers presents in more decorously measured language a similar enthusiasm for the unconstrained force of volition that is the core of the Cousinian self. Setting as his task to “inquire of consciousness what the ‘I’ is in the ordinary propositions ‘I will,’ ‘I think,’ ‘I sense,’” Saisset concludes that the first proposition is unique among the three for only in that case does the ‘I’ immediately cause what it perceives. Thought and sensation are not products of the moi, although they exist for us only insofar as the moi spotlights them with an act of attention. Volition is, however, a direct and exhilarating self-affirmation. Saisset experiences it as something akin to the ego trip of late twentieth-century American slang:

> I will. Doesn’t that mean “I produce,” “I cause a volition”? Of my accord, without being constrained by anything at all, I make up my mind to act in such and such a way? Isn’t that irresistible evidence for me that that resolution, that willing, is an effect of which I am the cause?[^138]

### Internalizing the Cousinian Self (2): Women

If the bourgeois male lycée students have left evidence of their internalization of the Cousinian language of the self mainly in the papers they were forced to write, the female outsiders, whose acquisition of Cousinian philosophical knowledge was never intended by the state educational system, comment more explicitly on its transformative impact. The exemplary case is Caroline Angebert who, as described in Chapter 4, wangled a correspondence course from the maître himself. Angebert’s sense of exclusion from the male enterprise of philosophy was acute. Visiting Paris in the autumn of 1829 (her official purpose was to intercede at the Naval Ministry on behalf of her husband, who had received an unwanted posting), she asked “everyone [she] met whether women could attend” Cousin’s Sorbonne lectures. She also made a Sunday “pilgrimage to the Rue d’Enfer,” where Cousin lived, and enacted the role of outsider by virtually pressing her nose against the glass. “I stopped for several moments in front of your door, and there I saw you in my imagination, surrounded by [male] disciples who were much happier but no more loyal than I.”[^139]

Once the maître had yielded to her entreaties and inducted her into his psychological method, Angebert gratefully provided him with detailed, exuberant accounts of her introspective experience. In January 1830 she reported, “I have [now] done enough to convince myself that psychology is neither cold nor arid; on the contrary, I feel that I will be strongly attached to it and that it is very fruitful.”[^140] Several months later she told him that “my psychological ardor has . . . taken me into depths where I have trouble seeing clearly and can hardly recognize myself.” Psychology, she eventually concluded, was a terrain intrinsically alien to women:

> I am, and with good reason, much more fearful when I speak to you in the name of those great truths that we all carry within ourselves. It is far easier for me to follow you headlong into ontology, whose most sublime roads are now and then accessible even to the weakest woman, than to approach you on the thorny path of psychological science.

That women in general should feel more comfortable with the impersonal and imposing truths of pure being than with the intimacy of psychology may seem counterintuitive to us. Nevertheless, Angebert explains quite convincingly why Cousin’s psychological method presents her sex with the stranger, more unaccustomed experience. In the case of ontology, she could, in her words, ascend “on [Cousin’s] wings,” thinking that the great principles she encountered were “made to be obeyed” and that “one would always work out a suitable accommodation to them.” Never had she dreamed that the ground rules of psychology would be so different, that they would entail actively “coordinating” great principles and “verifying them in my own mind.” Thus she concludes: “Almost everything in psychology was new for me.”[^141]

Angebert’s comments testify to the efficacy of Cousinian psychology as instruction in selfhood, as a kind of intellectual exercise in which one not only learned the arcane truths arrived at by others but vividly experienced one’s self as an autonomous source of truth. At first the techniques of introspection made Angebert feel like a “poor little thing,” alone on “an immense sea of time and space”; later she learned to “steer my little boat myself.” To be sure, Angebert sometimes expressed doubt about Cousin’s exclusive reliance on introspective data and informally tested his psychology against her own observations of young children. How, she wondered, could he seriously believe that consciousness of the moi preceded that of the non-moi when a child obviously “gives himself over so passionately to the objects which entice him. . . . Isn’t his mind more attached to the butterfly, to the bird he pursues than to the mental operation occurring within himself?”[^142] But in general, she applauded the instruction she received in the self-evidence of consciousness. Precisely because Angebert was not entitled to this instruction—indeed was officially debarred from it by the conventions and policies of the day—she noticed and recorded its impact on her. Unlike the bourgeois male lycée students, for whom Cousinian psychology was the required, crowning moment of a long, informal education in self-worth, Angebert experienced that psychology as bolt from the blue and a revelation.

While not as dramatic as the case of Angebert, that of Pauline Franck also illustrates the impact of Cousinianism on a female outsider. Franck, an autodidact Jewish governess and a woman of bold intellect, came by her Cousinianism with considerably less effort than Angebert. She married Adolphe Franck, the Cousinian disciple who would later edit the Dictionnaire des sciences philosophiques and become (under Cousin’s patronage) the first Jew to be elected to the Institut de France.[^143] During their long engagement (1831–38), when Pauline was in eastern France and Franck held teaching posts in various provincial and Parisian lycées, the two exchanged frequent letters, of which only Pauline’s seem to have survived.[^144] Such preconjugal correspondence was part of the ritual of nineteenth-century French bourgeois marriage, a delimited space of mutual seduction in which the already committed couple expressed their desire to be together.[^145] Although Pauline the letter writer routinely belittled her own mental powers, Franck consistently treated her as a worthy interlocutor and eagerly shared his intellectual life with her. Both motifs are evident in this passage from one of her letters of 1833:

> You have given me a very keen pleasure, my friend, by explaining to me the philosophical principles that you want to develop in your book. No doubt you have taken care to descend to my level because I found nothing unintelligible or obscure in your language. . . .[^146]

A similar letter from 1836 indicates that Franck had been regaling her with his work on psychology—weeks earlier she had even referred to “our psychology lessons”[^147]—and that Pauline lacked enthusiasm for this subject matter:

> You honor me more than I deserve, my friend, by asking my opinion of your philosophical style, and I disclaim all competence, stranger that I am to philosophical language generally. All that I know is that I understand you and find you extremely clear. I confess, however, that I preferred your letters from Douai: you were then discussing moral philosophy, which interested me much more than the principles of psychology. And if I didn’t fear being deceived by a preference of taste, I would say that you are more in your element when you treat the part of philosophy that teaches us the duty and destination of man.[^148]

But Franck, a student of Gatien-Arnoult,[^149] whose textbook expressed such concern about transmitting the capacity for introspection, had obviously given his fiancée solid instruction about the central place of psychology in Cousin’s system. For she immediately qualified her negative opinion by adding, “I nonetheless understand very well how important psychological investigation is; it is the base that sustains the edifice.”[^150]

Whatever Pauline’s views of psychology in the Cousinian mode—and, as we will see, they vacillated during the years of her engagement to Franck—her fiancé seems to have involved her in affectionate verbal play about the moi, egged on in this regard by her repeated gestures of self-deprecation. Asked her opinion of the post that Gatien-Arnoult had offered Adolphe, for example, she declined to reply on the grounds that “your will shall always be my own.”[^151] When Adolphe entreated her to include in her letters less about him and more about herself, she countered:

> You have thus reminded me that there was a difference to be established. But I have always found that talking about you is the same as talking about myself. For, my friend, a woman who lives entirely in her loved object regards her own existence as merely secondary.

Continuing in this vein, she criticized women with intellectual and literary aspirations. “To shine, that is always their goal, as if it were not a thousand times sweeter to love and be loved, as if we needed to be embellished by any glory other than that reflected from a beloved countenance.”[^152] In the intellectual relationship between Pauline and Adolphe, then, the roles of Caroline Angebert and Victor Cousin were reversed. Instead of claiming her equality, Pauline held fast to her subordinate, feminine status and, in response, Adolphe seems to have pressed selfhood upon her.

That pressure is evident in her explicit responses to his requests that she be more present in her letters and in the way that she uses the word moi, underlined in the standard philosophical style:

> It is not to assuage your anxiety that I am writing to you today . . . ; nor is it to compensate for my long silence. It is simply the inevitable moi that makes me pick up my pen. I am so happy while writing, such a sweet quietude comes over me in our amicable chats.[^153]

> During the interval that passed after my writing was interrupted, I received a letter from my brother. And since it is for moi that I am writing this time, you will know that it is still for moi and not for you that I take pleasure in transcribing the following passage. . . .[^154]

> I needed that little worry to balance the state of unaccustomed quietude in which I have been for some time now. I am sometimes tempted to wonder if I am really moi. What has become of all those bursts of imagination, those fevers of hope and expectation, those youthful daydreams that used to consume so many hours?[^155]

At the end of 1835, Pauline’s appreciation of the science of psychology apparently reached a zenith. Finding herself gripped by melancholy although her external situation had in no way changed, she wondered aloud to her fiancé why “the same causes subsisting, we are more keenly affected by them at one moment than at another.” Displaying her newly won sophistication, she immediately put this curiosity into a formal scientific frame: “Is it for psychology or for physiology to resolve the problem?” There was, she opined, doubtless a physiological component: the “mobile [physiological] organization of a woman” encouraged a quick succession of moods. But she came down on the side of the explanatory power of psychology. Significantly, for our purposes, she stressed the aspects of her self that she had been able to appropriate only under Franck’s tutelage in that science:

> In wondering how many of my faculties would have remained forever unknown to me without you, how many were perhaps stifled at their birth by the persistent anxiety that clouded my youth, I am led to conclude that psychology is a very vast and very difficult science. For isn’t it true, my gentle master, that it must provide us with an analysis of the human mind (âme)?

Equally significant was Pauline’s partial dissent from Cousinian psychological orthodoxy in this same letter. Perhaps as a result of her deeply imbued, conventional nineteenth-century female modesty, she could not accept that any individual moi was sufficiently grand to generate all of psychology. “Who would dare to give his moi as the rule without fearing to narrow [that science]? Who has lived so expansive an existence that he would have been able to feel every type of emotion?” Hence, while affirming the introspective method in psychology, she—much like Caroline Angebert—also wished to supplement it. “I believe, then, that psychology cannot be studied completely in the interior (foyer) of a single consciousness, that it needs to progress from observation of the individual to that of the thousands of varied phenomena that take place outside us.” Still, she ended her discussion by declaring her gratitude for Franck’s psychology instruction. “I should have begun by telling you that your lessons will never tire me,” in part because of the personal bond between the two of them, in part “because the science you treat has a marvelous attraction for me.”[^156]

Barely six months later, as we have seen, Pauline reported a decided lack of interest in psychology. Yet that pronouncement should be taken with a grain of salt, for subsequent developments would show that psychology was not something that she could easily let go. A letter from 1837 reveals that she has acquired an interest in disciplined introspection: she had talked to Adolphe of keeping a journal, writing in it each night, and sharing the contents with him. Ashamed that she has not yet done so, she speaks wryly of her inner life. “Raconter son âme—that would doubtless be very fine and pleasant for both of us, but to this narration is attached an indispensable condition: that of having an âme.” Her own spiritual substance is, she confesses, only sporadically in residence. “The noble inhabitant of my poor envelope makes frequent disappearances, goes off, and comes back without my being able to explain either its departure or its return.” Its absences produce what she calls “my vegetative period[s].” Reverting to her familiar posture of self-deprecation, she then jokes that God may have made only one soul for every two female bodies, indeed that Adolphe may regard this calculation as overly generous. Then, adopting a feistier tone, she hazards a guess that the percentage of men with spiritual substance is even lower, that “among the men themselves, Sir,” many of the “most gilded, most titled, most admired . . . haven’t the slightest divine spark!”[^157] Unlike Caroline Angebert, Pauline Franck had neither actively sought instruction in Cousinian psychology nor experienced it as a force comparable to conversion. She did continue to experiment with it—perhaps more accurately to toy with it—throughout the 1830s. It became part of her intellectual repertory, a linguistic medium for self-reflexivity and for musing on the differences between men and women.

### Extending the Cousinian Self: Guizot’s Theory of History

That the moi was not only an interior space but also an entity thoroughly implicated in the outside world was, of course, a Cousinian axiom. It was the point that Cousin made repeatedly when he called psychology the vestibule to ontology and mapped all of reality onto the three distinct elements composing consciousness (see Chapter 4). Hence it is hardly surprising that Cousin and his followers used his psychological doctrine to illuminate the objective world. The maître adumbrated the possibilities of such a project in his 1828 lectures when he interpreted the science of political economy in terms of the interaction between the moi and the non-moi: as the study of human industriousness, it treated “man metamorphos[ing] things” and “put[ting] on them the imprint of his personality, elevat[ing] them into simulacra of liberty and intelligence.”[^158] Some Cousinian textbooks explicitly articulated an imperialist agenda for introspective psychology. The preface to Damiron’s Cours de philosophie expressed the hope that a total, unified system of knowledge encompassing man, nature, and the divinity would one day be built on its foundation.[^159] In his introduction to the multi-author Manuel, Amédée Jacques likewise saw Cousin’s psychology as the master human science (“the science of God is called Theodicy, and the science of man Psychology”) and stated that rhetoric, history, politics, and jurisprudence all derived from a prior knowledge of human nature and the human mental faculties; “if they are not supported by psychology, they are built on sand.”[^160] An exhaustive study of what might be called “applied Cousinianism” is beyond the scope of this book. Having described elsewhere the place of the moi in Jouffroy’s aesthetic theory,[^161] I will confine myself here to the incursions of Cousinian psychology into Guizot’s extraordinarily popular and influential historical lectures, the Histoire de la civilisation en Europe (1828).

As a text proclaiming an optimistic faith in progress and identifying the bourgeoisie as a principal instrument of that progress, the Histoire was a natural candidate for colonization by Cousin’s bourgeois moi. Guizot’s stated goal was a grand narrative of the development of European civilization (a term that he was helping to invent), predicated on the assumption that, despite national variations, and French superiority, a basic unity obtained in the civilization that had taken root in Europe after the fall of the Roman Empire.[^162] Such a narrative had, in his view, to be permeated by philosophy. In part this philosophical element owed to the very definition of civilization that Guizot was employing: that which simultaneously advances the “development of man himself, as an individual” and advances “his visible condition, [his] society.” In order to make such value-laden assessments, Guizot recognized, he would have to tackle “the largest questions of moral philosophy.” Second, an “inevitable alliance between philosophy and history” was a characteristic, perhaps even the essential characteristic, of “our epoch.” Unlike all previous epochs, the one following the French Revolution was obliged to consider “science and reality, theory and practice” in tandem instead of allowing those two “powers” to go about their business separately.[^163]

Guizot did not specify the philosophy that he would bring to bear on his history but, not surprisingly, given the author’s background, a generically Cousinian strand can be discerned in the mix. One of the great themes of Guizot’s history is the transfer of power to the bourgeoisie. While this process culminated conspicuously in 1789, Guizot traced its roots back to the twelfth century when the burghers of certain communes wrested autonomy from the tyranny of the feudal seigneurs.[^164] Because he regarded the inner development of the individual as an intrinsic part of civilization, Guizot’s sociopolitical history necessarily contained an important psychological element. One of the questions implicitly raised by his narrative was how the bourgeoisie could have acquired the psychological strength they needed to confront their betters and, eventually, to assume power.

Guizot found the answer to that question in the long-term historical development of the sentiment de la personnalité, or feeling of personhood: he used both the precise Cousinian expression[^165] and variants on it that highlighted the typically Cousinian theme of free volitional activity. As he saw it, the barbarian warriors who conquered the decaying Roman Empire brought an essential component to the evolving European sentiment de la personnalité. To be sure, barbarism connoted the very opposite of the civilization that Guizot was tracing. He nonetheless believed that the barbarians’ “pleasure in individual independence, pleasure in playing, with [their] power and liberty, amidst the opportunities of the world”—the brief description evokes a joyousness rare in Guizot’s repertory—was the precious germ of a developmental principle and sequence culminating in civilization.[^166]

The feudal seigneur, a subsequent incarnation of the barbarian, retained that germ and added to it the sense of importance accruing to him as “property-owner, head of family, master.” These two psychological attitudes together produced in him a “feeling of immense superiority, a very particular superiority different from the ones found in [the elites of] other civilizations.” Roman patricians, for example, derived, indeed “borrowed” their social superiority from their corporate existence: they wielded political power as members of the senate. Similarly, their power to officiate in religious ceremonies was delegated to them by the gods. But the possessor of a fief experienced his personality in a different register; his “grandeur” was “purely individual; he held nothing from anyone; all his rights, all his power came to him from himself alone.” Guizot regarded this proud and even “insolent” sense of self as one of the defining marks of feudalism (féodalité) and, eventually, one of its central contributions to European civilization. “Individuality, the energy of personal existence, such was the dominant fact among those who conquered the Roman world. The [historical] development of individuality thus had to result, above all, from the social order founded by and for them.” Or, even more pointedly, several lessons later:

> The feudal regime gave to all who participated in it the continual example of resistance. In no way did it present to the mind the idea of an organized, imposing government capable of regulating everything, of subduing everything solely by its intervention. On the contrary, what it provided was the unending spectacle of individual will refusing to submit. . . . The feudal regime rendered this service to humanity: to demonstrate unceasingly individual will deploying itself in all its energy.

The burghers of the towns were, as early as the tenth century, the beneficiaries of this great lesson. “Despite their weakness, despite the prodigious inequality of condition between them and their feudal overlords, the towns rose up everywhere,” obtaining charters that granted them, at least on paper, a sphere of autonomy.[^167]

The sentiment de la personnalité, Guizot continued, assumes a causal role in history—or, in his phrase, it serves as one of the “two sources from which can flow, in the political realm, greatness of ambition and firmness of purpose.” The first of these sources is social power, wielding actual influence over people on a vast scale. The second is subjective and psychological power: “bear[ing] in oneself an energetic feeling of complete individual independence, certitude about one’s own liberty, the consciousness of a destiny foreign to every other will but that of the man himself.” His account of how the bourgeoisie acquired their particular brand of that compelling sentiment, how they become in their turn world-historical actors, is complicated, indirect, and never fully articulated. It is not a story of simple imitation of the feudal seigneur. There are setbacks: the twelfth century saw the crystallization of the traits of timidity, humility, fearful modesty—paradoxically amidst “steadfast conduct”—that the burghers would pass on even to their distant descendants. There is inevitable domestication: the “soft activity of modern times,” as opposed to the perilous and bellicose life of earlier eras, resulted in the loss by the bourgeoisie of that rough-and-ready “male character” and “obstinate energy” that characterized their medieval forebears. At the same time there emerged the sentiment de la personnalité in the more abstract, bourgeois, but also universal form characteristic of modern civilization: “the full consciousness of the grandeur of man as man (l’homme en tant qu’homme), of the power that belongs to him if he is capable of exercising it.”[^168] Guizot’s definition is strikingly similar to the one that Habermas would offer a hundred and a fifty years later of the brunt of the Enlightenment and the conceptual apparatus that made a public sphere possible: the discovery of “pure humanity, of “the “human being as such,” unmarked by particular social qualifications.[^169]

In sum, it is possible to read Guizot’s Histoire de la civilisation en Europe as the working out of Cousinian psychology on a historical canvas. Such an interpretation is not only textually grounded but also bolstered by Guizot’s involvement, almost from its inception, in the project of constructing a non-sensationalist form of philosophical psychology. By twists and turns, Guizot asserts, the raw sentiment de la personnalité of the feudal seigneur developed into the more intricate one of the medieval burgher and then into the appreciably tamer, less vibrant one of the sedentary nineteenth-century bourgeois. Guizot’s crisp description of the sentiment in question—one of independence, willfullness, experiencing oneself as a cause in the world—corresponds perfectly to the attributes of the moi in the Cousinian psychology that was taught in every nineteenth-century French lycée after 1832. Furthermore, his specification of a modern decline from the titanic energy of the founders corresponds to Cousin’s metaphysical move of imposing on the moi conformity to the most prosaic of value systems. His characterization of the nineteenth-century form of the sentiment as simultaneously universal and class-based corresponds, finally, to Cousin’s perpetual waffling about everyone’s possession of a moi in principle and only the elite’s possession of one in practice. That Guizot enlisted the psychological concept of the moi to recount the historical rise of the bourgeoisie confirms yet again the bourgeois nature of that self. That he did so in a book repeatedly reprinted during the course of the nineteenth century was yet another manifestation of Cousianian cultural hegemony.

### NOTES

The epigraph is from Cousin to Francisque Bouillier, 14 January 1843, in C. ‘Latreille, Francisque Bouillier: Le dernier des cartésiens, avec des lettres inédites de Victor Cousin (Paris: Hachette, 1907), p. 188.

[^1]: 1. A.-Jacques Matter, “Moi,” in Dictionnaire de la conversation et de la lecture, 52 vols. (Paris: Belin-Mondar, 1832–39), 38: 259–61, esp. 259.

[^2]: 2. Matter appears in the “Liste générale des rédacteurs,” Dictionnaire des sciences philosophiques, 6 vols. (Paris: Hachette, 1844–52), 6: 1046, a sure mark of membership in the Cousinian school, as discussed later. He also corresponded periodically with Cousin, calling him his “natural protector” in a letter of 1828; see Cousin manuscripts, Bibliothèque de la Sorbonne (henceforth, Cousin MSS), vol. 239, #3425.

[^3]: 3. For this editorial self-representation, see the untitled preface to the Dictionnaire de la conversation et la lecture, 1: 3. The list of contributors on the page facing the title page confirms their claim of ecumenism: it includes Victor Cousin and François Guizot as well as their arch-enemies François Broussais and Armand Marrast.

[^4]: 4. The term was coined in the 1780s by Jacques Tenon, a surgeon and formulator of enlightened health policy. See Michel Foucault et al., Les machines à guérir (aux origines de l’hôpital moderne) (Paris: Institut de l’environnement, 1976), first page of preface (n.p.) and p. 55 n. 1.

[^5]: 5. Caroline Angebert to Cousin, 15 November 1830, Cousin MSS, vol. 214, #87.

[^6]: 6. Charles-H. Pouthas, Guizot pendant la restauration: Préparation de l’homme d’état (1814–1830) (Paris: Plon, 1923), p. 21.

[^7]: 7. Ibid., p. 326; see also Anne Martin-Fugier, La vie élégante, ou la formation du Tout-Paris, 1815–1848 (Paris: Fayard, 1990), p. 242. Cousin was suspended in November 1820, Guizot in October 1822.

[^8]: 8. The letter is quoted in Pouthas, Guizot, p. 355.

[^9]: 9. Ibid., p. 445.

[^10]: 10. See “M. Cousin, conseiller de l’Université,” Gazette des écoles, 12 August 1830, p. 265 and, for the quotation, “De l’ordre légal dans l’Université,” ibid., 19 August 1830, p. 273.

[^11]: 11. For the assertion of Cousin’s “never publicly claimed paternity” of this law, see Jules Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire, M. Victor Cousin: sa vie et sa correspondance, 3 vols. (Paris: Hachette, 1895), 1: 378–79, 3: 228. For the contrary assertion that Cousin’s claim of paternity was “an exaggeration,” see Douglas Johnson, Guizot: Aspects of French History, 1787–1874 (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1963), p. 127. On the government funding of Cousin’s trip to Prussia, see AN: 42 AP 21, Guizot papers, “Note pour répondre à des calomnies contre M. Cousin.”

[^12]: 12. Cousin to a certain Monsieur Müller of Weimar, 24 June 1833, in Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire, Cousin, 3: 228.

[^13]: 13. See Johnson, Guizot, pp. 128–29, which ascribes these views to Guizot. According to Charles Pouthas, however, only Cousin wanted a severe limitation of the upward social mobility of the popular classes, while Guizot intended to use the écoles primaires supérieures to modernize the French economy and actively encourage selective ascension into the bourgeoisie. See his unpublished typescript, “L’oeuvre de Guizot au ministère de l’Instruction publique (1832–1837),” AN: AB XIX 3760, pp. 78, 258.

[^14]: 14. Johnson, Guizot, pp. 131–33, 133 for the quotation. The state authority over the primary schools was jointly exercised by the Ministry of Public Instruction, the Université, and the prefects.

[^15]: 15. Maine de Biran, Journal, ed. Henri Gouhier, 3 vols. (Neuchatel: La Baconnière, 1954–57), 1: 24 (17 October 1814); and “Réponse à M. Guizot” (1814) in Oeuvres de Maine de Biran, ed. Pierre Tisserand, 14 vols. (Paris: F. Alcan, 1920–49), 10: 259–77, esp. 261.

[^16]: 16. Maine de Biran, Journal, 2: 33 (13 April 1817), 39 (4 May 1817), 39 n. 1, 54 (10–18 July 1817).

[^17]: 17. Guizot, “Encyclopédie,” in Encyclopédie progressive, ou collection de traités sur l’histoire, l’état actuel et les progrès des connaissances humaines, 2 vols. (Paris: Au bureau de l’Encyclopédie progressive, 1826) 1: 1–48, p. 7 for the quotation.

[^18]: 18. On Guizot’s central role in the development of the civilization concept, see Lucien Febvre, “Civilisation: evolution of a word and a group of ideas,” in A New Kind of History, ed. Peter Burke, trans. K. Folca (New York: Harper and Row, 1973), pp. 219–57, esp. 240–48.

[^19]: 19. Guizot, “Abrégé: Des abrégés ou du véritable but et du meilleur mode de composition des ouvrages élémentaires,” Encyclopédie progressive, 1: 305–20, esp. 305–7, 309 for the quotations.

[^20]: 20. Ibid., pp. 311–13.

[^21]: 21. See the letters from Jouffroy among Guizot’s personal papers, AN: 42AP 145, including one dated 4 January 1836 from Pisa, where Jouffroy has gone for health reasons, in which he regales Guizot with information about his physical condition: “I will not beg pardon for entering into these details; you have too often given proof of the interest that you take in my health for me to hesitate in supplying them to you.”

[^22]: 22. Théodore Jouffroy, “Préface du traducteur,” in Dugald Stewart, Esquisses de philosophie morale (1st ed., 1826), 3rd ed. (Paris: Johanneau, 1841), pp. iii, v.

[^23]: 23. Guizot, “Abrégé,” p. 312.

[^24]: 24. AN: 42 AP 21,”Programme de la seconde partie du cours de psycologie [sic] élémentaire,” undated, MS p. 1r and separate sheet pinned to MS p. 2v. An archivist’s note identifies the handwriting as Jouffroy’s. The “Programme” is inside an envelope labeled “Documens philosophiques et littéraires sur l’instruction publique en France,” which also contains a “Programme abrégé du cours de philosophie fait au Collège royal de Henri IV pendant l’annéee 1817–1818, et au Collège r[oy]al de Bourbon pendant l’année 1816–1817” written in a different, apparently secretarial hand. Unidentified by the archivist, the latter is almost certainly the work of GeorgesGabriel Mauger, who taught philosophy at those institutions during those years; see Mauger, Vues sur l’enseignement de la philosophie, 2d ed. (Paris: Deterville, 1818), Avant-Propos, p. 1. A disciple of Royer-Collard and Scottish common-sense philosophy who was apparently unconnected to Cousin, Mauger was eager to overhaul and expand philosophy instruction in the French secondary schools. Hence the logic behind Guizot’s possession of both these programmes.

[^25]: 25. Robert Gildea, Education in Provincial France, 1800–1914: A Study of Three Departments (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983), pp. 35, 42.

[^26]: 26. AN: F17* 1795, “Procès-verbaux des délibérations du Conseil royal de l’instruction publique” (July–September 1832), session of 28 September 1832, fol. 434–36. The quotations come from the psychology program, items 4, 10, 11.

[^27]: 27. “Circulaire du 8 avril 1833, relative aux questions de philosophie sur lesquels doivent être interrogés les aspirants au grade de bachelier ès lettres,” in Cousin, Défense de l’Université et de la philosophie, 3d ed. (Paris: Joubert, 1844), pp. 362–63.

[^28]: 28. This point is emphasized in Pouthas, “L’oeuvre de Guizot,” pp. 9–14, 257.

[^29]: 29. On these points, see Jean-Louis Fabiani, Les philosophes de la république (Paris: Minuit, 1988), pp. 9–10, and the debate over philosophy instruction in the secondary schools in the Chamber of Peers in 1844. The Duc de Broglie asserted, “In France, the last year of [secondary school] classes has always been called the philosophy class.” Moniteur universel, 13 April 1844, p. 926.

[^30]: 30. See Paul Janet, “L’enseignement de la philosophie dans les lycées,” Revue bleue, 4th ser. 1 (January–June 1894): 241–46, 246 for the quotation.

[^31]: 31. This is a rough formulation of Guizot’s position on capacité and suffrage, a position that shifted in subtle ways over the course of his career while always retaining its basic advocacy of the bourgeoisie; see Pierre Rosanvallon, Le moment Guizot (Paris: Gallimard, 1985), pp. 121–32, and Lucien Jaume, L’ individu effacé, ou le paradoxe du libéralisme français (Paris: Fayard, 1997), pp. 130–37. For Guizot’s classic statement of the universality of the bourgeoisie, see The History of Civilization in Europe, Lecture 7, in François Guizot, Historical Essays and Lectures, ed. Stanley Mellon (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972), p. 207.

[^32]: 32. See, e.g., some of the statistics in Gildea, Education in Provincial France, pp. 71, 128, 146–47, 165.

[^33]: 33. A.-Jacques Matter, L’instituteur primaire, ou conseils et directions pour préparer les instituteurs primaires à leur carrière et les diriger dans l’exercice de leurs fonctions, 2d ed. (Paris: Hachette, 1843), pp. 106–7, 117 (for the definition of “psychologie”). That the first edition of this book, called simply L’instituteur primaire (Paris: Hachette, 1832), contains none of the material quoted underscores the role of Cousin’s curricular changes in popularizing the term “psychology.”

[^34]: 34. Ibid., p. 120.

[^35]: 35. Ibid., p. 106.

[^36]: 36. See “Arrêté du 28 septembre 1832,” in Cousin, Defense de l’Université, pp. 359–62, esp. article 1, p. 359.

[^37]: 37. On the 1902 reform, see John E. Talbott, The Politics of Educational Reform in France, 1918–1940 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969), pp. 16–17. On the cultural place of Latinity generally, see Françoise Waquet, Latin, or the Empire of a Sign: From the Sixteenth to the Twentieth Centuries, trans. John Howe (London: Verso, 2001).

[^38]: 38. Gildea, Education in Provincial France, pp. 187–88.

[^39]: 39. “D’une discussion entamée dans la Chambre des deputés, le 29 mai,” Le Semeur: Journal religieux, politique, philosophique, et littéraire 4 (1835): 217–24, 242–44, esp. 217. In fact, Guizot was both a defender of traditional classical education and an advocate of the expansion of scientific education to meet modern needs; see Pouthas, “L’oeuvre de Guizot,” pp. 165–66.

[^40]: 40. See “Règlement du baccalauréat ès lettres, du 14 juillet 1840” and “Circulaire de M. le Ministre de l’instruction publique, du 17 juillet 1840, relative au nouveau règlement du baccalauéat ès lettres” in Cousin, Défense de l’Université, pp. 363–64. On the nineteenth-century philosophy programmes, see John I. Brooks III, The Eclectic Legacy: Academic Philosophy and the Human Sciences in Nineteenth-Century France (Newark: University of Delaware Press, 1998), chap. 1, and Fabiani, Philosophes de la république. The long persistence of the Cousinian programme is discussed in the Epilogue, later.

[^41]: 41. AN: 42 AP 21, “Note pour répondre à des calomnies contre M. Cousin.”

[^42]: 42. On Cousin’s initiative in creating the philosophy agrégation, see “Facultés des lettres. Institution des agrégés. Rapport au roi et ordonnance royale,” dated 24 March 1840, in Victor Cousin, Oeuvres, new ed., 16 vols. (Paris: Ladrange, 1846–51), ser. 5, vol. 1, pp. 269–82. For the quotation from the letter, see Cousin to Bouillier, 5 August 1845, in C. Latreille, Francisque Bouillier: le dernier des cartésiens, avec des lettres inédites de Victor Cousin (Paris: Hachette, 1907), p. 196.

[^43]: 43. Dictionnaire des sciences philosophiques, 6 vols. (Paris: Hachette, 1844–52). The brief article, “Moi,” 4: 284–86, is unsigned, the indication of Franck’s authorship according to the “Liste génerale des rédacteurs,” 6: 1045.

[^44]: 44. On this point, see Lawrence Rothfield, Vital Signs: Medical Realism in Nineteenth-Century Fiction (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992), p. 17. The quotation is from Madame Bovary, trans. Paul de Man, Norton Critical Editions (New York: W. W. Norton, 1965), pp. 22–23.

[^45]: 45. As indicated on the page facing the title page of vol. 1, that firm is Panckoucke, connected not only with the two Dictionnaires but also with the smaller format editions of the Encyclopédie of Diderot and d’Alembert.

[^46]: 46. See Adolphe Franck to Victor Cousin, 17 October 1843, Cousin MSS, vol. 229, #2058. “Everything [concerning the first installment of the Dictionary] is ready, except the Foreword, whose terms must be decided in common, under your direction. I would be extremely grateful if you would convene without delay the meeting that you were kind enough to mention to me.”

[^47]: 47. “Préface des auteurs,” Dictionnaire des sciences philosophiques, 1: v–vi.

[^48]: 48. I discuss the beleaguered situation of early nineteenth-century French philosophy in Console and Classify: The French Psychiatric Profession in the Nineteenth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), chap. 7.

[^49]: 49. Max Weber, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, trans. Talcott Parsons (New York: Scribner’s, 1958), pp. 104, 109–12.

[^50]: 50. Cousin’s Du vrai, du beau et du bien (Paris: Didier, 1853), was widely adopted as a textbook and became ubiquitous in France from its first publication until the 1880s. It was, in his words, a “severely corrected” version of the foundational courses he had offered at the Paris Faculty of Letters between 1815 and 1821 and represented an effort to respond to the requests he had repeatedly received to “assemble into a corpus of doctrine the theories scattered throughout our different works.” See the Avant-Propos, pp. i–ii.

[^51]: 51. Maine de Biran, Journal 2: 92 (18 November 1817).

[^52]: 52. See Elemens d’idéologie, 3d ed., 2 vols. (Paris: Courcier, 1817; reprint, Paris: Vrin, 1970), 1: 148 n. 152.

[^53]: 53. P. Laromiguière, Leçons de philosophie, ou Essai sur les facultés de l’âme, 2d ed, 2 vols. (Brunot-Labbe, 1820), 1: 195.

[^54]: 54. On the style of twentieth-century U.S. textbooks—their use of a single voice and avoidance of any scrutiny of the signifying practices of language—see Daniel Segal, Introduction, Staging History: Western Civ and Its Aftermaths in American Higher Education (in preparation).

[^55]: 55. See, e.g., the prefatory comments by a minor Cousinian, Antoine Charma, Réponses aux questions de philosophie contenues dans le programme adopté pour l’examen du baccalauréat ès lettres (Paris: L. Hachette, 1835), pp. 3–4.

[^56]: 56. The textbooks considered here are: A. F. Gatien-Arnoult, Programme d’un cours de philosophie (1st ed. 1830), 4th ed. (Toulouse: Bon et Privat, 1841) and its companion volume of readings, Cours de lectures philosophiques, ou dissertations et fragmens sur les principales questions de philosophie élémentaire (Paris: J. B. Paya, 1838); Charma, Réponses; Charles-Auguste Mallet, Manuel de philosophie à l’usage des élèves qui suivent les cours de l’Université (Paris: Maire-Nyon, 1835); Amédée Jacques, Jules Simon, and Emile Saisset, Manuel de philosophie à l’usage des collèges (Paris: Joubert, 1846).

[^57]: 57. Gatien-Arnoult, Programme, p. 22, italics in the original.

[^58]: 58. Gatien-Arnoult, Cours de lectures, p. 81 n. 1, quoting from a journal entry made in Nancy on 21 November 1828.

[^59]: 59. Gatien-Arnoult, Programme, 4th ed., pp. 23–24.

[^60]: 60. Charma to Cousin, 17 April 1832, Cousin MSS, vol. 222, #1223: “J’ai traversé la psychologie sans encombre.” He admitted, with more humility, that he later foundered on the “almost inevitable” shoals of ontology.

[^61]: 61. Charma, Réponses.

[^62]: 62. Mallet, Manuel, pp. 7, 23–24.

[^63]: 63. Jacques et al., Manuel, pp. 180–81.

[^64]: 64. Ibid., p. 181.

[^65]: 65. Ibid., pp. 207–8, my italics.

[^66]: 66. Ibid., p. v.

[^67]: 67. See Epilogue, later.

[^68]: 68. Jacques et al., Manuel, describes the “utility” of psychology as providing the student with the “exact meaning of that multitude of words that designate the movements and affections of the soul and that form a considerable part of the vocabularies of all languages.” See “Introduction,” pp. 15–16.

[^69]: 69. Bouillier, “Discours d’ouverture prononcé à la faculté des lettres de Lyon, le 28 novembre 1844,” Revue des Lyonnais 20 (1844): 420–32, esp. 424.

[^70]: 70. Jacques et al., Manuel, p. 15.

[^71]: 71. Some of Cousin’s letters to his students are accessible elsewhere, usually in published biographical accounts of the individual students. For example, Latreille, Francisque Bouillier, includes fifty-one of them.

[^72]: 72. In fact, the only personal reference to sexual matters that I found in these letters occurs in Vacherot to Cousin, April 4, 1836, vol. 251, #5041. While discussing the issues of “duty” surrounding his broken and then resumed engagement (see later), Vacherot abruptly changes register and mentions his carnal feelings for his considerably younger fiancée. “At my age, besides, after having led a strictly single life, one can fear the storms of passion; I experience no difficulty in confessing this to you. But I take myself to be a young man who has struggled [presumably with lust] and conquered, but who is not sure that he will always conquer. . . .”

[^73]: 73. Foucault, The History of Sexuality, vol. 1: An Introduction, trans. Robert Hurley (New York: Vintage, 1980), pp. 60, 62, 64, 68–70.

[^74]: 74. AN: 87 AP 9, Simon papers, Dossier 4: Les premiers travaux de Jules Simon (1836–65), “La philosophie et l’enseignement officiel de la philosophie,” MS p. 5, my italics.

[^75]: 75. Bersot to his father, 5 July 1844, in Ernest Bersot, Fragments de ses lettres à sa famille de 1836 à 1871 (Paris: Impr. Ch. Noblet, 1913), p. 76.

[^76]: 76. Paul Janet to Cousin, 28 June 1846, Cousin MSS, vol. 234, #2674.

[^77]: 77. Jules Barni to Cousin, 29 July 1843, Cousin MSS, vol. 215, #237.

[^78]: 78. Debs to Cousin, 2 December 1839, Cousin MSS, vol. 224, #1495.

[^79]: 79. Mallet to Cousin, 19 March 1838, Cousin MSS, vol. 238, #3248.

[^80]: 80. Debs to Cousin, n.d., Cousin MSS, vol. 224, #1493.

[^81]: 81. Mallet to Cousin, 26 June 1839, Cousin MSS, vol. 238, #3252.

[^82]: 82. Gatien-Arnoult to Cousin, n.d., Cousin MSS, vol. 214, #123; Charma to Cousin, 31 December (no year), Cousin MSS, vol. 222, #1225; Bouillier to Cousin, 12 October 1839, and 28 June 1840, Cousin MSS, vol. 219, #778, #782.

[^83]: 83. “Nouvelles diverses,” Gazette des écoles, 19 September 1830, p. 312.

[^84]: 84. Jules Simon used it as the title of chap. 3 of his Victor Cousin (Paris: Hachette, 1887).

[^85]: 85. Bersot to his family, 19 August 1837, in Lettres à sa famille, p. 30.

[^86]: 86. Cousin to Royer-Collard, 20 October 1833, in Bibliothèque de l’Institut de France, MS 3990, my italics.

[^87]: 87. Bersot to Cousin, 9 March 1842, vol. 217, #470: “surtout quand on tient des épaulettes de vous.”

[^88]: 88. Riaux to Cousin, 5 November 1843 and 23 January 1846, Cousin MSS, vol. 245, #4295, #4302. See also Simon to Cousin, n.d., Cousin MSS, vol. 249, #4766; and Cousin to Bouillier, 27 June 1843, in Latreille, Francisque Bouillier, p. 192.

[^89]: 89. Riaux to Cousin, 21 April 1843, Cousin MSS, vol. 245, #4294.

[^90]: 90. Bersot to Cousin, 18 June 1842, Cousin MSS, vol. 217, #474.

[^91]: 91. Delcasso to Cousin, 26 June 1842, Cousin MSS, vol. 224, #1565.

[^92]: 92. Ernest Renan, Souvenirs d’enfance et de jeunesse, ed. Laudice Rétat (Paris: Garnier-Flammarion, 1973), p. 212.

[^93]: 93. Barni to Cousin, 3 July 1846 and 4 July [1846], Cousin MSS, vol. 215, #238, #239. Barni’s angry letter was addressed “Monsieur”; his grateful one returned to the more affectionate “Monsieur et mon cher maître.”

[^94]: 94. Charma to Cousin, 26 August 1837, Cousin MSS, vol. 222, #1226.

[^95]: 95. Charma to Cousin, n.d., Cousin MSS, #1224.

[^96]: 96. See Charma, Du sommeil (Paris: Hachette, 1851), p. 10, where Charma quotes an entry in his personal journal dated 18 Avril 1836: “I cannot explain to myself how philosophy came to abandon that subject matter [madness] to physiology without at least demanding a part of it. When in 1836 Pierre Rivière of Aunay was brought before the criminal court of Calvados, six or seven physicians were consulted about his mental state. I wondered then why some of our psychologists would not also be consulted.”

[^97]: 97. Michel Foucault, ed., I, Pierre Rivière, having slaughtered my mother, my sister, and my brother . . . : A Case of Parricide in the Nineteenth Century (French ed., 1973), trans. Frank Jellinek (New York: Pantheon, 1975).

[^98]: 98. Charma to Cousin, 26 August 1837, Cousin MSS, vol. 222, #1226.

[^99]: 99. Charma to Cousin, 17 April 1832, Cousin MSS, vol. 222, #1223.

[^100]: 100. Charma to Cousin, n.d., #1224.

[^101]: 101. Charma to Cousin, 26 August 1837.

[^102]: 102. Charma to Cousin, 16 June 1843, Cousin MSS, vol. 222, #1227.

[^103]: 103. Charma to Cousin, n.d. and 7 June 1851, Cousin MSS, vol. 222, #1230, #1231.

[^104]: 104. Janet to Cousin, Cousin MSS, vol. 234, #2672, #2673; both letters are undated. For more on Paul Janet’s subsequent career, see Epilogue, later.

[^105]: 105. Accounts of Cousin’s involvement with Louise Colet, whose daughter Henriette he may have fathered, and of the affaire Colet-Karr of 1840, which resulted from Alphonse Karr’s allegation of Cousin’s paternity in the satirical journal Les Guêpes, can be found in Micheline Bood and Serge Grand, L’indomptable Louise Colet (Paris: Pierre Horay, 1986), Jean-Paul Clébert, Louise Colet: la muse (Paris: Presses de la Renaissance, 1986), and Francine du Plessix Gray, Rage and Fire: A Life of Louise Colet (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1994).

[^106]: 106. Simon, Victor Cousin, p. 184.

[^107]: 107. Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire, Cousin, 2: 524.

[^108]: 108. Cousin to Bouillier, 7 March 1849, in Latreille, Francisque Bouillier, p. 204.

[^109]: 109. Bouillier to Cousin, 10 January [1848], Cousin MSS, vol. 219, #817.

[^110]: 110. Bouillier to Cousin, 4 March [1848], Cousin MSS, vol. 219, #818.

[^111]: 111. Bouillier to Cousin, 6 August [1848], Cousin MSS, vol. 219, #821. He repeated this phrase in #825, 28 November [1848].

[^112]: 112. He also believed that Bouillier possessed the requisite “firmness of heart” that would ensure that a domestic life would not interfere with his philosophical and civic life; see Cousin to Bouillier, 7 March 1849.

[^113]: 113. Vacherot to Cousin, 2 November 1835, Cousin MSS, vol. 251, #5039.

[^114]: 114. Vacherot to Cousin, 4 April 1836, Cousin MSS, vol. 251, #5041.

[^115]: 115. Vacherot to Cousin, 9 May 1836, Cousin MSS, vol. 251, #5042.

[^116]: 116. Vacherot to Cousin, 24 October 1836, Cousin MSS, vol. 251, #5043.

[^117]: 117. Vacherot to Cousin, 9 May 1836, my italics.

[^118]: 118. Vapereau to Cousin, 2 May 1843, Cousin MSS, vol. 251, #5094.

[^119]: 119. Vacherot to Cousin, 9 May 1836.

[^120]: 120. Mallet to Cousin, 21 December 1837, Cousin MSS, vol. 238, #3247.

[^121]: 121. See Emile Saisset, “De la philosophie du clergé,” Revue des mondes, 1 May 1844, a criticism of the renewed clerical attack on philosophy by such figures as Bautain and Lacordaire; and “Renaissance du Voltairianisme,” ibid., 1 February 1845, a parallel criticism of Michelet’s harsh attack on the clergy in the Du prêtre, de la femme et de la famille. The term spiritualisme conciliateur appears in the first article.

[^122]: 122. Vacherot to Cousin, 16 January 1836, Cousin MSS, vol. 251, #5040.

[^123]: 123. My account comes almost entirely from the letters of Bersot to Cousin, Cousin MSS. A more detailed account can be found in Vermeren, Victor Cousin, chap. 10.

[^124]: 124. Bersot to Cousin, 10 October 1840, 13 November 1840, and 2 December 1840, Cousin MSS, vol. 217, #467, 468, 469.

[^125]: 125. Ernest Bersot, Réflexions sur M. Lacordaire (Bordeaux: Impr. de P. Coudert, 1842), a reprint from the periodical L’Indicateur. See p. 4, for Bersot’s response to Lacordaire’s characterization of philosophy as a cold science bereft of the energizing power of love.

[^126]: 126. Bersot to Cousin, 9 March 1842, Cousin MSS, vol. 217, #470.

[^127]: 127. Bersot to Cousin, 11 March 1842, Cousin MSS, vol. 217, #471.

[^128]: 128. Bersot to Cousin, 1 May 1842, Cousin MSS, vol. 217, #473, my italics; the letter contains the phrase maître de moi.

[^129]: 129. Ibid., my italics.

[^130]: 130. Vermeren, Victor Cousin, pp. 256–57, quoting Cousin to Bersot, 10 March 1842.

[^131]: 131. Simon to Cousin, n.d., Cousin MSS, vol. 249, #4762.

[^132]: 132. See letters of Bouillier to Cousin, Cousin MSS, vol. 219: 12 October 1839 (#778); 14 December 1839 (#779); 28 June 1840 (#782). Jouffroy’s loss of his Catholic faith, which occurred while he was a student at the Ecole normale and studying philosophy with Cousin, had been described by Jouffroy in his personal journal and was well known during this period; see Camille Aymonier, Théodore Jouffroy de Pontets (Pontarlier: Faivre-Vernay, 1919), p. 15.

[^133]: 133. AN: F17 4163, “Concours de sortie 1820, Résultats du concours qui a eu lieu entre les élèves qui ont terminé leur cours normal et qui se destinent à l’enseignement des lettres, Dissertation philosophique.” The dossier contains twelve philosophy examinations. On the Ecole normale under the Restoration, see Pierre Jeannin, Deux siècles à Normale Sup’: Petite histoire d’une grande ecole (Paris: Larousse, 1994), pp. 31–39.

[^134]: 134. Examination of Henri-Jean Pottier, in “Concours de sortie 1820,” my italics.

[^135]: 135. Examination of Jules Thibault, in ibid.

[^136]: 136. Examination of Alex-Emile Lefranc in ibid., my italics.

[^137]: 137. Examination of Gillette, in ibid.

[^138]: 138. “17ème question. Du moi. De son unité et de son identité,” an unnumbered document bound after letter #4563 in Cousin MSS, vol. 247. A note in the upper left-hand corner reads “redaction en philosophie de Monsieur Emile Saisset, élève à l’école normale en 1833.” Cousin, we can surmise, kept the composition because it seemed to him an exemplary response to the seventeenth question of the 1832 programme.

[^139]: 139. Angebert to Cousin, 12 November 1829, Cousin MSS, vol. 214, #82.

[^140]: 140. Angebert to Cousin, 21 January 1830, Cousin MSS, vol. 214, #83.

[^141]: 141. Angebert to Cousin, 26 April 1830, Cousin MSS, vol. 214, #84.

[^142]: 142. Angebert to Cousin, 22 August 1830, Cousin MSS, vol. 214, #85.

[^143]: 143. Franck’s election took place in 1844. On his academic career and his involvement in Jewish community affairs, see A la mémoire d’Adolphe Franck: Discours et articles (Paris: Impr. J. Montorier, 1893), and Perrine Simon-Nahum, La cité investie: La science du judaïsme français et la République (Paris: Cerf, 1991), pp. 73–78.

[^144]: 144. See Pauline Franck, Une vie de femme: Lettres intimes (Tours: Impr. Paul Bousrez, 1898). The collection was edited by Pauline’s daughter, Marguerite, who decided not to include her father’s letters because he was already well known through his public writings; see Preface, pp. 7–8. My thanks to Aron Rodrigue for alerting me to this source.

[^145]: 145. On this point, see Danièle Poublan, “Les lettres font-elles les sentiments? S’écrire avant le mariage au milieu du XIXe siècle,” in Séduction et sociétés: Approches historiques, ed. Cécile Dauphin and Arlette Farge, (Paris: Seuil, 2001), pp. 141–82.

[^146]: 146. P. Franck to A. Franck, 23 April 1833, in Vie de femme, p. 41.

[^147]: 147. P. Franck to A. Franck, letter of 15 April 1836, in ibid., p. 223.

[^148]: 148. P. Franck to A. Franck, 30 May 1836, in ibid., 249–50.

[^149]: 149. See ibid., p. 32 n. 1. Franck prepared for the philosophy aggregation at Toulouse under Gatien-Arnoult’s supervision, receiving the highest grade on that examination in 1832 and thus coming to Cousin’s attention. For another reference to Gatien-Arnoult as Franck’s teacher, see P. Franck to A. Franck, 5 June 1834, in ibid., p. 103.

[^150]: 150. P. Franck to A. Franck, 30 May 1836, in ibid., pp. 249–50.

[^151]: 151. P. Franck to A. Franck, 12 June 1833, in ibid., p. 53.

[^152]: 152. P. Franck to A. Franck, 14 January 1834, in ibid., pp. 83–85.

[^153]: 153. P. Franck to A. Franck, 4 June 1834, in ibid., p. 98.

[^154]: 154. P. Franck to A. Franck, 5 June 1834, in ibid., p. 105.

[^155]: 155. P. Franck to A. Franck, 18 December 1834, in ibid., p. 123.

[^156]: 156. P. Franck to A. Franck, 28 December 1835, in ibid., pp. 195–96.

[^157]: 157. P. Franck to A. Franck, 21 March 1837, in ibid., esp. pp. 322–23.

[^158]: 158. Cousin, Introduction à l’histoire de la philosophie (Paris: Pichon et Didier, 1828), Lesson 1, pp. 11–12.

[^159]: 159. Damiron, Cours de philosophie, 1: xxvii.

[^160]: 160. Jacques et al. Manuel, pp. 6–7, 11–12.

[^161]: 161. See Jan Goldstein, “Eclectic Subjectivity and the Impossibility of Female Beauty,” in Picturing Science, Producing Art, ed. Caroline A. Jones and Peter Galison (London: Routledge, 1998), pp. 360–78.

[^162]: 162. Guizot, Histoire de la civilisation en Europe depuis la chute de l’empire romain jusqu’à la révolution française, new ed. (Paris: Didier, 1846), Lesson 1, pp. 3, 5.

[^163]: 163. Ibid., Lesson 4, pp. 91–92.

[^164]: 164. Ibid., Lesson 7, p. 188.

[^165]: 165. See, e.g., ibid., Lesson 4, p. 99.

[^166]: 166. Ibid., Lesson 2, p. 57. On the linkage of barbarism and civilization in Guizot, see Jacques Billard, De l’ecole à la république: Guizot et Victor Cousin (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1998), pp. 36–60, esp. p. 51.

[^167]: 167. Guizot, Histoire de la civilisation en Europe, pp. 99–101, 119, 195–96, my italics.

[^168]: 168. Guizot synoptically sketches this long development in ibid., pp. 206–7.

[^169]: 169. Jürgen Habermas, The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a Category of Bourgeois Society, trans. Thomas Burger (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989), pp. 46–48 for bourgeois “psychological emancipation” and p. 88. Note that Guizot includes in this definition the Doctrinaire proviso about capacité that tempers universalism with practical restrictions on political participation.
