## 6 Religious and Secular Access to the Vie Intérieure: Renan at the Crossroads

The travails of the Cousinian regiment in the provinces, as described in the previous chapter, make plain the frictions between eclecticism and Catholicism that could intrude into everyday life during the 1840s—frictions summed up in the contemporary Bordelais quip that “Catholic doesn’t rhyme with eclectic.” But, confined to institutional politics and suffused with a sense of raw urgency, the accounts provided by Cousin’s former students are necessarily limited in scope. Especially conspicuous from the vantage point of this book, they fail to probe the relationship between the two doctrines at the phenomenological level. How did Cousinian philosophical psychology and Catholic piety compare as alternate mid- nineteenth-century modes of access to an interior life? Were the clergy who “persecuted” the teachers of eclectic philosophy correct in their assessment that the kind of interiority encouraged by Cousin was inimical to their own, religious project? Did Catholic belief stand as a barrier to the appropriation of a Cousinian moi among men whose elite social status otherwise qualified them for that endowment?

An account of the rise of Cousinian-style selfhood cannot easily ignore such questions. Traditional religious discourse served, after all, as a basis of self-understanding for many nineteenth-century Frenchmen, and hence the way Catholicism articulated with an increasingly ascendant Cousinianism requires investigation. Obviously, however, the questions cannot be posed with respect to Catholicism tout court, which existed in myriad nineteenth-century varieties and was held as a belief with many different degrees of intensity and rigor. But the questions become manageable when they are directed to a single, well-situated figure—a microhistorical approach that allows at least an informed approximation of the broader and more general answers.

In the 1840s the young Ernest Renan happens to have occupied a strategic position just at the intersection of the Catholic and Cousinian currents. Fortunately for our purposes, the young man who would later become a cultural figure of towering proportions—the positivist pioneer of the French historical criticism of the Bible, the philologist who helped to construct the fundamental (and fateful) opposition between Semites and Aryans, the theorist of nationhood[^1]—was also a natural virtuoso of the inner life. At the age of twenty, for example, he wrote to his sister that “careers entirely filled with exterior occupations repel me; they do not allow a person to live with himself, they prevent reflection, they make you a stranger to yourself.” He regularly found, he added, consolation in the thought that a “man always possesses one sure resource—to take refuge in himself and there to avenge, through sheer enjoyment of himself, all external servitude.”[^2] Some eighteen months later, again addressing his sister, he disparaged the sort of people who sought out social intercourse for no other reason than as an “occasion to exit themselves and [thereby] to stifle the boredom [that is for them] inseparable from reflection on the moi.”[^3] By using the young Renan as a case study, this chapter will attempt to discern the similarities and differences, as they were lived by practitioners, between the Cousinian psychology and one of its Catholic counterparts.

The Breton-born Renan had been drawn to a religious vocation from an early age. The son of a ship’s captain who died at sea leaving his family in genteel poverty, he attended the Paris seminaries of Saint-Nicolas du Chardonnet, Issy, and Saint-Sulpice on a scholarship and went so far as to accept preliminary (and still revocable) ordination as a priest. But doubts about the compatibility of Catholic dogma with rational-scientific procedures of inquiry assailed him, and he departed Saint-Sulpice definitively in 1845, at the age of twenty-two, to pursue a career as a secular scholar. Chiefly responsible for corroding his faith was the taste for philosophy Renan had acquired while in the seminary itself, during the two years of mandatory instruction in that subject at Issy.[^4] As he recounted to his mother at the time:

> My studies hold an ever greater attraction for me. I have recovered all my old appetite for mathematics. . . . As for philosophy, I’m a bit more of a novice, but I get as much pleasure from it as from math, all the more so since we have as yet encountered nothing very difficult in it. It is incomparably the finest thing to study and the one most worthy of man.

Going on to say that he derived particular pleasure from philosophical argument, he described the intense and aggressive culture that had developed around that activity at the seminary. “Two pupils tackle each other hand to hand on a question, then engage in a duel to the death,” all metaphorically, of course, since the weapons employed were words. Nevertheless, the sport continued ruthlessly until one of the combatants was forced to concede defeat. “Every Sunday we do this in public, and every day seven or eight of us get together to do it privately.”[^5]

Exactly when and how Renan encountered the Cousinian brand of philosophy is unclear. Piecing together the sometimes contradictory evidence in the manuscripts of his youth and in his retrospective autobiographical work, the Souvenirs d’enfance et de jeunesse (initially published in installments between 1876 and 1882), it appears that Renan first learned about Cousin’s philosophical psychology from the detailed and energetic Catholic refutations of it that were standard fare at the seminary, especially the 1840 work of the abbé Henry Maret, Essai sur le panthéisme dans les sociétés modernes.[^6] Around the time that he left the seminary, Renan grappled with Cousin directly, undertaking a close reading of a published version of the master’s foundational 1818 Sorbonne course on the true, the beautiful, and the good.[^7] His abundant notes on that text both summarized its contents and subjected them to strenuous criticism, revealing that the independent-minded Renan would toe the line neither of the reigning philosophical maître nor of his theological detractors. In any event, the text seems to have left an indelible mark on its young reader. In the jottings he made during his summer vacation of 1845, while in the throes of his agonizing decision to leave the seminary, Renan depicted the introspective modality featured in Cousin’s philosophy as nothing less than the central symptom of modernity:

> What characterizes the modern era is radical reflexivity, the folding back on oneself. In the realm of philosophy, psychology is everything. (V. Cousin, 1818, Lesson 1). In literature, we no longer tell stories in the manner of Homer and the Bible; instead we paint the impressions and sentiments suppressed by the ancients, who assumed that such things went without saying. There are works devoted to nothing but that—epistolary novels, etc. . . . For us, . . . there is no longer anything pure, as there is in the naive and popular sensibility. I have experienced it a thousand times. When I love, when I suffer, when I think, I have a model in mind or, at least, if my sensibility runs ahead of me, I reflect [afterward] and I am pleased to see that it conforms to that model. Everything begins with: I think, therefore I am.[^8]

The notebooks he kept from mid-1845 until the end of 1846 mention Cousin nearly twenty times[^9] and, at the beginning of his academic career, he became a contributor to the Cousinian encyclopedia project, the Dictionnaire des sciences philosophiques.[^10] Some years later, when Renan published an article on Cousin in the Revue des deux mondes, he remained adamant about the enduring cultural legacy of the founder of eclecticism. The man had possessed the boldness, he now exclaimed, to create the philosophy imposed by the Université on all of France; he had single-handedly determined what young Frenchmen would be taught “about God, the universe, and the human mind!”[^11] And in 1885, reviewing a new book about Cousin, his comments took on a more personal, nostalgic coloring. He remembered his first reading of Cousin’s 1818 lecture course four decades earlier: “Its impact on me could not have been more profound. I knew those wingèd phrases by heart; I dreamt about them. I am aware that some of my mental frameworks come from [that source].”[^12]

If, in young adulthood, Renan had an accurate appreciation of Cousin’s looming historical importance, and had even been caught up in his spell, he was remarkable in keeping that factual assessment and that personal impressionability separate from his always cool appraisal of the intrinsic intellectual quality of the man’s work. Both tendencies are evident in his letters to his sister in the early 1840s. On the one hand, he was happy and proud to lean on Cousin’s authority to bolster his own contention about the high intellectual calibre of his seminary education: “The seminaries of Saint-Sulpice and Issy are directed by a congregation of priests free of episcopal control who have always been known for moderation [in their interpretation of dogma]. Monsieur Cousin has just published a work in which he lavishes deserved praise on them.”[^13] However, a couple of years later he described “Monsieur Cousin and eclecticism” in disabused fashion as an “imitation” of the contemporary German philosophy that he was then reading in the original and “very pale” by comparison.[^14]

At some point in the early 1840s Renan made a deliberate decision between Catholic orthodoxy and the rational critical faculty, a decision that implicitly entailed a comparable choice between the versions of interiority offered by the priests of Saint-Sulpice and by psychological scientists like Victor Cousin. Apparently he came to regard the latter as the more factually accurate and emotionally congenial of the two options. Renan’s choice did not immediately affect his long-standing tendency to gravitate to the inner life. But he now elected to conduct his interior explorations in a secular register—much as his eighteenth-century predecessor at Saint-Sulpice, the religiously tone-deaf and less fully introspective abbé Sieyès, had done (see Chapter 3). This chapter will attempt to reconstruct how Renan navigated his passage from the religious vie intérieure to its scientific-psychological counterpart and to indicate what was at stake in such a choice. Unlike the lycée students routinely initiated into Cousinian psychology, who had little to say about its impact on them, Renan sought out the Cousinian moi and was consequently well aware that it made a difference.

### The Religious Inner Life, or Mediated Introspection

The category of a religious inner life is not, with respect to Renan, a historian’s methodological construction. In the notebooks he kept in the immediate aftermath of his departure from Saint-Sulpice, Renan used precisely that expression, beginning a paragraph with the pregnant sentence, “Here is my fundamental principle of the religious inner life (vie intérieure religieuse).”[^15] And indeed the same expression, in slightly abbreviated form, figures in the title of the basic seventeenth-century work of Sulpician piety, the Catéchisme chrétien pour la vie intérieure (1656), composed by the abbé Jean-Jacques Olier, the founder of the order. Renan knew this text well, calling it “among the most extraordinary of books, full of poetry and somber philosophy.”[^16] His frequent references to it in his autobiography show that he viewed it as a kind of metonym for the traditional Sulpician belief structure, and that he moreover regarded that belief structure as still vital during the first half of the nineteenth century.[^17] The actual publication history of Olier’s Catéchisme, with its abundant early nineteenth-century reprintings, confirms Renan’s sense of its continued relevance.[^18] So does Renan’s description of the ambience of the seminary he entered in 1841: “What struck me upon arriving here is the tenacity with which customs are maintained. . . . The times have changed, but Saint-Sulpice is still the same as in the days of Monsieur Olier.”[^19] More recently, historians have discerned a distinct revival of Olier’s brand of spirituality at Saint-Sulpice in the decades following the fall of Napoleon.[^20] Hence, despite its composition nearly two centuries earlier, Olier’s Catéchisme can provide us with an idea of how the concept of the vie intérieure was understood by Renan qua seminarian as well as by a whole group of early nineteenth-century French Catholics.

What it discloses is not, of course, necessarily applicable to all French Catholics of the era. Olier’s religiosity was, as Renan aptly depicted it, of a highly specific sort: on the one hand “mystical” and on the other so gloomy in tone as to make Calvin’s seem “almost optimistic.”[^21] Although Renan does not supply its intellectual genealogy, it belonged firmly to what would later be called the French school of spirituality or, alternatively (and perhaps more accurately), the Bérullian school.[^22] According to the standard narrative, Pierre de Bérulle laid down the basic and enduring lines of this counterreformation current in order to reinvigorate the piety of both clergy and laity and thus to protect them against the temptations of Protestantism; Olier was a major contributor to the movement’s second generation and, by some accounts, its master popularizer.[^23] Often described as theocentric, Bérullianism recommended awe as the appropriate human posture before a glorious, all-powerful God and insisted that human beings, mere creatures of God, accordingly recognize themselves as utterly nothing: this latter axiom constituted the movement’s signature gloominess.

Most important for us here is the strong emphasis on the psychological domain that derived from and to some extent alleviated the movement’s pessimistic anthropology. Bérullian spirituality held out to the faithful the possibility of bridging the ontological abyss that separated the divine and the human, of communing intimately with God, especially by identifying with and conforming to the “states” (états) of Jesus—that is, the interior dispositions by which God’s son had lived out the mysteries of his incarnation, passion, death, and resurrection. As one modern commentator has schematized this spiritual modality, it moves back and forth between two poles: a “mystical pole,” which is the believer’s ecstatic “life in Christ,” and a “pole of Christian ascesis,” or of rigorous personal discipline that, in this case, takes the striking form of a “death to oneself.”[^24] Given this schema, it is hardly surprising that the Bérullian movement invented and injected into Catholic discourse a whole vocabulary of interiority, featuring such terms as “états de Jésus” and “intérieur de Jésus.”[^25] The embrace of the psychological was one of the most distinctive traits of Bérullianism and a key difference between it and one of its main competitors, the Jesuit version of French Catholicism. As the historian Henri Bremond puts it, “While Saint Ignatius makes us contemplate the ‘deeds’ of Jesus especially, Bérulle makes us contemplate his ‘states.’” Correspondingly, the follower of Ignatius poses the “moral problem” by asking himself what course of action he should follow—remaining in the world or quitting the world, keeping his fortune or distributing it to the poor. The Bérullian by contrast asks, “‘What is my share of Christ’s heritage? Which of his ‘states’ am I particularly called upon to reproduce, apply, and link myself with henceforth?’”[^26]

At the point in his development at which Renan encountered Olier’s brand of Bérullian religiosity, its psychological orientation must have harmonized well with his temperament. By all indications, he had a decidedly introspective bent long before he came to Paris, for he recounts in his autobiography that as a young boy in Brittany he conducted his “examinations of conscience” with such energy that he even anxiously inquired of his confessor if he might unwittingly have committed the mysterious sin listed in his manual: simony by trafficking in benefices![^27] One institutional consequence of Olier’s psychological sensibility was the centrality given to the work of the directeur spirituel in the formation of Sulpician priests; as part of the nineteenth-century revival of Olier’s theology at Saint-Sulpice, his manuscript fragments setting forth his techniques for the guidance of souls were finally published for the first time in 1831, just a decade before Renan’s enrollment at the seminary.[^28] Renan obviously found this kind of spiritual exercise congenial. In 1841 he wrote happily to a boyhood friend that the “choice [of a spiritual director] is of the greatest importance here [at Issy]; the director is everything for each student.”[^29] It was thus a source of pain to him that the gentle Father Gosselin, whom he had carefully selected as his director, failed to see within his soul accurately enough to detect the crisis of faith that was brewing there and that another priest at the seminary, who had viewed him only from afar, instead “delivered a thunderbolt into my consciousness . . . and with a brutal hand tore off all the bandages by which I hid from myself the wounds of an already ailing faith.”[^30]

This general outline of Bérullian spirituality can help us to make sense of Olier’s Catéchisme, to pinpoint its doctrinal particularities and, most important for purposes of this chapter, to understand the experience of interiority it held out as a model. Whether Renan actively sought to cultivate a religious inner life on this model while at Saint-Sulpice is unclear.[^31] But we can say with assurance that he knew what the model was and appreciated the authority that it commanded within the walls of the seminary.

In at least one salient respect Olier’s text was generically and universally Catholic: it stressed the dependence of the believer on a process of mediation. More specifically, the vie intérieure mentioned in its title was not immediately accessible to the individual consciousness. In fact, that sought-after inner life was nothing but the vie intérieure de Jésus-Christ, defined as a condition of mind and heart that, when residing in an individual, entitled that individual to the name of Christian. Olier’s Bérullian specificities emerge as he enumerates the key features of this interior domain. Beginning with the generically Catholic features, such as “its religious attitude toward God, its love of its neighbor,” he proceeds to the characteristically Bérullian ones: “its annihilation of itself (anéantissement envers soi-même), its horror of sin, and its condemnation of the world and its maxims.”[^32] From a secular standpoint, it is certainly a very strange form of interiority indeed that is predicated on obliterating all traces of the self! This annihilation is recognizable to us as the pole of ascesis that leads the Bérullian believer to ecstatic union with the divine. Recalling the hatred of the mundane self (“le moi est haïssable”) enshrined in the writings of Pascal (see Chapter 3), Olier’s formulation thus starkly underscores the difference between one Catholic version of interiority and the Cousinian version; it brings home the long intellectual distance that had to be traveled to arrive at the Cousinian valorization of the moi. It also disqualifies Bérullian interiority as an experiential source of what, in this book, I am calling self-talk.[^33]

Olier’s treatment of the will similarly contrasts to Cousin’s. Postulating both a fallen will that came into being with the transgression in the Garden of Eden and a regenerate will made possible by Christ’s death and resurrection, the Catéchisme expresses strong disapproval of the former. “Yes,” agrees the respondent in the question-and-answer format, “the will is called flesh when it adheres to the movements of the flesh.” But divine grace, the respondent declares many lessons later, changes that lamentable situation. “We have no use of our powers—no illumination by the mind, no movement of the will—except insofar as we acquire them from Jesus Christ. Because of Adam’s sin, we deserved to lose everything. But what we lost we have recovered in Christ.”[^34]

The regenerate will bears little resemblance to its natural counterpart. Instead of being, as Cousin would have it, our primal, originary property and thus the very essence of human personhood, it is noteworthy for being not exactly our own. This regenerate will and, indeed, the entire regenerate soul (âme) are “deiform”—that is, congruent with the soul of the resurrected Christ which, having “entered into [God’s] interior and intimate states,” has itself assumed a “total resemblance to [that of] God his father.”[^35] Let me attempt to make explicit the assumptions implicit in the Catéchisme. The bifurcated nature of human existence—that is, the stark duality between the fallen and the regenerate conditions—explains why we can, in a Catholic register, probe our inner lives only in mediated fashion. What we fallen creatures are seeking when we seek our inner life is, after all, intimate contact with our pre-lapsarian, “deiform” selves, with the still retrievable traces left on us by our divine Creator before we perversely chose to mar His handiwork. Access to that lost but ultimately authentic vie intérieure is not possible through immediate introspection: such futility is the very definition of the fallen condition. Access becomes feasible only through identification with the external reference point that God has provided for us in the earthly manifestation and the sacrifice of Christ.

According to the Catéchisme, the new, regenerate, and timeless human soul is still “able to see outside itself, to see its ‘old man,’ its flesh that continues to change and to alter.” However, because its viewing position is now “always intime, always interior to itself,” its fleshly incarnation takes on an alien cast and no longer poses serious temptations. The regenerate, deiform self “remains firm,” refusing to “demean itself” by reverting to corporeal ways.[^36] From that position of interiority, the individual can presumably assess the degree of incursion of unruly fleshly impulses on the serenity of his “new man.” That is, we can surmise that the achievement of religious interiority also entails a degree of attentiveness and access to that secular, fallen psyche that the scientific discipline of psychology takes as its sole object of investigation. But unlike its secular counterpart, religious interiority is inconceivable without God and inseparable from knowledge of God. It requires not merely the split subject of secular introspection (the subject that both observes and is observed) but God as a third, mediating term.

The conception of religious interiority as knowledge of the Divinity who inhabits the psyche of the regenerate individual had certain very practical consequences for the conduct of life. For example, according to an 1841 biography of Olier with which the young Renan was familiar, Olier and his successors never made appeals or solicitations to individual young men to enter the seminary of Saint-Sulpice. Persuading individuals to bend their wills in a certain direction, influencing a personal process of decision-making, was thoroughly irrelevant to the Sulpician recruitment effort. The members of the order believed instead that the true religious vocation was the work of God within the individual and hence that qualified seminarians would hear an unequivocal inner call and spontaneously identify themselves to the superiors of the order.[^37] The same motif can be seen in Renan’s vocabulary when he was in the throes of uncertainty about whether to go through with the rite of tonsure. To make the decision, he did not seek to fathom his own desires, needs, and preferences or to make contact with his own personal will; or at least he refrained from publicly representing himself as engaged in such activities. Rather, he pledged to “neglect nothing [that would] indicate to me the will of God on this point.”[^38] Or, in another formulation some six weeks later after he had achieved greater clarity on the issue: “Never have I felt with more profound inner conviction, never have my superiors assured me more unanimously, that the will of God was that I be a priest.”[^39]

With greater instructional precision than Cousinian philosophy professors could ever muster with respect to the immediate introspection they demanded of their pupils, the Sulpicians offered methods for the attainment of the religious inner life. Their technology of the self included concrete procedures, sometimes even paraphernalia. Thus the entire second half of Olier’s Cathéchisme was devoted to “a principal means of acquiring and retaining” that conformity with the inner life of Christ that was synonymous with “the Christian spirit.”[^40] The means in question was prayer, itself an activity totally dependent on supernatural grace.[^41] In order to annihilate the natural self (the locus of what Olier called amour-propre) in preparation for the admission of its regenerate counterpart, a specific posture, both physical and emotional, as well as specific words of self-abnegation, were recommended. “Placing yourself on your knees, entirely covered with shame because of your internal wickedness, you will first say . . . ‘My God and my all, I renounce myself and the sinful inclinations with which I am filled. . . .”[^42] Olier also recommended that the seminarian keep a written record of his lapses so that they would remain fresh in his memory.[^43]

Another practice of Sulpician interiority still alive and well in the 1840s was a negative one, a performance of the annihilation of the worldly self designed to foster, through the creation of a void, the mystical infusion of the life in Christ. Renan reports in his autobiography that, to avoid all possible celebrity, “the rule of the Sulpicians is to publish nothing except under the veil of anonymity” and even then to write using the most bland and pallid literary style.[^44] Recognized authorship, that peculiarly modern Western form of selfhood and self-assertion, was expressly forbidden.[^45]

Olier took pains to cultivate religious interiority not only among the priests he trained in his seminaries but also among his most humble and untutored parishioners. For this latter group, access to the vie intérieure was to be doubly mediated: they could most easily make contact with the divine spirit that constituted their regenerate selves not through Christ directly but through Christ as found in the Virgin Mary. The sensuous immediacy of pictorial images was, moreover, to aid the people in this process of religious self-discovery. Olier commissioned engravings of two drawings by Charles Le Brun, the Court painter to Louis XIV who frequently served at Saint-Sulpice as the imagistic translator of the founder’s religious thought.[^46] These reproductions were then distributed widely among the families of the parish. (“Hardly were they made known before a multitude of pious souls wished to have them [continually] before their eyes.”) The first, the more relevant to us here (see Figure 5), was additionally reproduced on one of the stained glass windows of the Church. Called the “Intérieur de la Vierge,” and depicting the “life of Jesus in Mary,” it showed the Virgin

> in the clouds, her hands crossed over her chest, where the Spirit of Our Lord in the form of a dove spread all the riches of his grace. The eyes of this divine Mother were raised to heaven and fixed on the monogram of Jesus, Savior of Man. This signified that if the Holy Spirit was always the principle of her actions, as represented by her hands, the love of Jesus and the salvation of souls were always the goal of those actions. Below appeared the words, which functioned as an invitation to the viewer to be united with [the Virgin’s] interior dispositions: “With her, by her, and in her.”

[To view this image, refer to the print version of this title.]

Figure 5: A Technology of Religious Interiority. Le Brun’s late seventeenth-century etching of “The Interior of the Holy Virgin” was designed to aid the laity and, later, the clergy in the cultivation of the religious inner life through a double mediation: by identifying with Mary’s inner states, believers would gain access to those of Jesus and finally catch a glimpse of their own prelapsarian selves. Renan may well have encountered the etching at the seminary of Saint-Sulpice in the 1840s and may even have attempted to use it for this purpose. (Bibliothèque Nationale de France, Cabinet des Estampes)

According to the author of a nineteenth-century work on Olier’s cult of Marian devotion, or the “inner life of the Very Holy Virgin,” Olier’s disciples generalized the cult after his death, making it applicable to clerics as well as to the laity. An annual service “in honor of the inner life of Mary” at all the seminaries of Saint-Sulpice, and especially that of Paris, was still ongoing and vital in Renan’s day. It functioned at its inception as a “new means of aiding aspirants to the priesthood to form inside themselves the interior of this divine Mother”—that is to say, as a means of cultivating, through double mediation, their own religious inner lives.[^47]

### Catholic Objections to the Cousinian Self

The fundamental difference between immediate and mediated introspection suffices to explain the hostility that many Catholic leaders felt toward Cousin’s teaching. For while God was the absolutely indispensable element of the Catholic vie intérieure, Cousinian psychology happily opened up an inner space without Him. It postulated—indeed it prodded the initiate to experience at firsthand—a faculty of volition that, while purely human, was not contemptibly mired in the flesh but was as fully free, active, and even awe-inspiring as its divine equivalent. Not only did Cousin’s psychology go about its business without reference to God. Since it was, in Cousin’s celebrated phrase, the “vestibule” to ontology and metaphysics, the Cousinian moi served as the epistemological grounding for the existence of God and for the role of God in history rather than vice versa. A mere glance at Cousin’s 1832 philosophy programme or at any Cousinian textbook exposed this topsy-turvy (from the Catholic standpoint) order: psychology was, emphatically, the first branch of philosophy to be treated; it was followed by logic, then by morals, and finally by theodicy. Cousin did not, to be sure, go anywhere near as far as his defiantly blasphemous German contemporary, the Young Hegelian Ludwig Feuerbach, who in his Essence of Christianity (1841) depicted God as the creation of a self-deceived, self-alienated humanity. Nevertheless, he could legitimately be read—as he was by many Catholics—as tacitly asserting either a parity between the human and the divine or, worse still, the primacy of the human.

Cousin’s precise “intentions” in this regard, even if they are regarded as the appropriate object of a historical investigation,[^48] can probably never be known. Since his working-class childhood is shrouded in obscurity, so too are his early religious education and the subsequent development of his religious beliefs. He has left behind a few shreds of information in the form of references to the piety of his mother and to the “naive faith” that she had imparted to him but that he had failed to carry into adulthood.[^49] It is clear that the adult Cousin wanted, for pressing political reasons, to develop an anti-sensationalist psychology friendly to religion. However, by all indications, the religion he had in mind was more akin to a minimalist, rational deism than to Catholicism, with its demands for faith in revealed truth and submission to clerical authority.

In a seemingly candid and surprisingly affectionate exchange of letters with his liberal Catholic adversary, the abbé de Lamennais, in 1825–26 (the two men compared notes on their physical ailments and fretted about each other’s health), Cousin argued for the possibility of reconciling their apparently antithetical views. But in this endeavor he always described himself and his philosophy as “Christian,” never as “Catholic.” “You see, Sir,” he pointed out to Lamennais, “that I am a Christian requiring indulgence but, I repeat to you, seriously, my philosophy is Christian.” A month later he announced, “I kneel down before catholicism,” using a lowercase “c” and indicating that he took the word to mean a universal criterion for truth, rather than the doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church. “But it is in Christianity especially that I seek it,” he continued, “although it may be elsewhere as well. In a word—and I speak to you from the bottom of my heart—I am or at least would like to be a Christian philosopher.”[^50] Yet, even in this modest depiction of his religiosity, Cousin may have been less ingenuous than he sounded. Maine de Biran, for one, characterized Cousin’s personal religious beliefs as just barely deistic. After a “good philosophical conversation with the young professor Cousin” in 1821, he noted matter-of-factly in his journal, “Professor C., who knows no other revelation than that of reason, denies the present influence of a higher intelligent force on our spirit (âme).”[^51]

The image of Cousin as a thinker who irreverently aggrandized the human at the expense of the divine could not have been one he sought. It derived from his failure to control all the implications of the complex philosophical system he set in play, even as it may have accurately represented personal convictions that he would have done better to hide. In any case, it was an image that Cousin frequently tried to dispel.

The 1840 work of the abbé Maret, Essai sur le panthéisme dans les sociétés modernes, is a typical expression of Catholic outrage at Cousin’s philosophy, if one that sparked an unusual amount of interest. Its author was a young priest who had “just emerged from his humble cell at Saint Sulpice” (he would later be appointed to the Faculty of Theology at the Sorbonne—an act of calculated contrition by none other than Victor Cousin as minister of public education!—and would rise in the clerical hierarchy to become an archbishop). Maret’s nineteenth-century biographer tells us that all the educated classes in France, both clerical and lay, avidly read the Essai as soon as it appeared. Its first printing sold out within weeks, and a second followed before the end of the year. The book also had an international resonance and was quickly translated into German and Italian and, somewhat later, into Spanish and Polish.[^52] As already mentioned, it functioned among the seminarians at Saint-Sulpice, including Ernest Renan, as the principal, authorized conduit of information about Cousin’s philosophy. Hence it has particular value for us here, revealing not only what Renan initially learned about the secular psychology of the Sorbonne maître but also what he, as a priest-in-the-making, was supposed to find distasteful about it.

The success and wide readership of Maret’s book no doubt owed to its broad scope, the general cultural criticism in which it embedded its specific, religious criticism of Cousin. The book’s preface began by granting the contemporary ascendancy of Cousinianism and its apparently salutary implications for Catholics. The fact that “philosophy [had] entered a spiritualist path” could only be seen as a happy turn of events against the background of the antireligious tendencies of the eighteenth-century Enlightenment. But, Maret continued, the current vogue of spiritualism was in fact illusory, a kind of reassuring window dressing. In the absence of a vital belief in the Christian God—an aspect of the contemporary situation to which the Cousinians neither paid heed and nor devoted rehabilitative efforts—a nominal spiritualism had actually turned into the most arid materialism. As Maret analyzed this transformation, souls deprived of a divine object “fall back on themselves” and “finding there neither power nor consolation, cravenly descend again [i.e., as in the eighteenth century] into enslavement by the senses.” Perversely, the high-minded nineteenth-century spiritualist philosophy had thus produced nothing but “egoism, thirst for gold, love of material comfort, and weak character.”[^53]

This widely unacknowledged devolution of spiritualism was more complex and pernicious still. For in the place of an evacuated God, nineteenth-century thinkers had installed man. They sought “man’s law in himself,” depicted humanity as “inspired and infallible,” and believed that the inexorable progress of the human spirit was “the sole and necessary revelation of God.” Such maneuvers, which a religious idiom would have pejoratively identified as pridefulness, were instead endorsed as “science.” Maret reversed this evaluation, branding the putative science of the development of humanity over time a heretical “pantheism.” By this he seems to have meant that, defying the Bérullian postulation of a chasm between divine omnipotence and human nullity, the so-called science of man distributed the qualities of the divinity so wantonly among mundane phenomena that it obliterated the fundamental Christian distinction between God and His worldly creation. The chief formal property of this new scientific pantheism was, Maret observed, the “desire to embrace everything, to explain everything” by reference to some newly discovered law—an astute characterization that fits many nineteenth-century intellectual systems. But despite this wildly ambitious goal, continued Maret, these sciences of man actually explained nothing at all because they pointedly failed to invoke God as an explanation, subordinating Him instead to human causes.[^54]

Maret instantiated this general thesis with respect to many nineteenth-century thinkers, but he focused on Cousin. Having subjected Cousin’s philosophy to serious study, he had, he reported, become “convinced that it is, at bottom, nothing but pantheism.” Maret’s use of “pantheism” as a smear word crystallizing Catholic objections to Cousin soon became standard in French polemics.[^55] Outside Catholic circles, however, the term seems initially to have sounded as curious as it does to us now. When, in 1844, the Chamber of Peers was debating the moral implications of teaching the Cousinian philosophy in the state secondary schools, one legislator marveled at the “strangeness” of the “reproach” that had been routinely leveled against it.

> What to say about the invention of this word “pantheism”? Pantheism is an opinion that has existed for a long time, for some twenty centuries, but I thought it existed in India rather than in France. I will not discuss here what pantheism is. The way in which that term has been invoked makes it impossible not to see it as one of those partisan slurs (mots de parti) whose meaning is not understood even by those who use it. What relation is there between the professor of our era, of our country, and the . . . Brahmans of India who went off into the ancient forests to admire nature and ended up fusing themselves with it, forgetting all terrestrial ideas? That portrait resembles no contemporary philosopher. [Laughter][^56]

The legislator, of course, exaggerated the exoticism of the term, which was not only applied by Europeans to Vedic religion but also had been used, at various moments throughout the history of Christianity, to label a type of heresy.[^57] Still, he justly underscored its bizarre novelty in a nineteenth-century political context as well as its status as a mot de parti, valued more for its slanderous effect than for its precise content.

Taking Cousin’s 1828 Sorbonne course as his text, Maret presented several interlocking arguments to support his allegation of pantheism. He faulted Cousin for making inferences about the nature of divine reason on the basis of his findings about human reason, a procedure that assumed the complete parity of the two. He called Cousin’s theory of God an “anthropomorphism . . . full of errors and blasphemies” because it ascribed a “human life” to God—that is a movement, which Cousin had also described in human reason, limited to the dispersion of unity in multiplicity and the bringing back of multiplicity to unity, a movement which contained only the three terms of finitude, infinity, and their relationship. And he was especially incensed that Cousin identified this “triplicity,” ultimately rooted in the human psyche, with the dogma of the Trinity. His “strange theology” thus denied the true, Catholic version of the same dogma, which postulated a “divine life absolutely separate from all contact with the created, the contingent, the finite.”[^58]

Another strategy for demonstrating Cousin’s displacement of the divine by the human occupied Maret in the Essai and, more especially, in an influential pamphlet of 1845 that examined Cousin’s doctrine of the relationship between religion and philosophy.[^59] Here Maret’s criticism turned on Cousin’s distinction between spontaneity and reflection, the same bedeviled distinction that, as discussed in Chapter 4, Cousin enlisted to give his philosophy its strong social-class bias. According to Maret, Cousin consistently found the source of religion in a “natural faculty. . . common to all men” called spontaneity. Classified in the Cousinian system as the “first form and manifestation of reason,” this faculty produced an instinctive perception of divine truth accompanied by enthusiasm that the Sorbonne maître identified as religion. Maret leapt on this account, viewing it as a powerful example of Cousin’s anti-Catholic impulse “to reduce Christian mysteries to psychological phenomena (faits psychologiques) [and] purely rational conceptions . . . to eliminate every superhuman or incomprehensible element from mystery.”[^60]

Cousin exhibited this same impulse even more baldly, Maret contended, when he considered the higher manifestations of human reason, especially reflection. In Cousin’s system, “human consciousness under the eye of its own reflection” constituted philosophy. Now the content of spontaneity and reflection were the same—a Cousinian credo that we have already encountered. The two differed only in form, spontaneous religion presenting certain truths as “poetic image[s]” or “venerable symbols,” and reflective philosophy presenting those same truths as “intelligible ideas, purely rational concepts.” In the present historical condition of humanity, certain groups, such as “the people” and “children,” were capable of apprehending the truths in question only in their religious form. But philosophers, who were (in Maret’s snide paraphrase of Cousin) the “elite of the human species, the aristocrats of thought,” could remove the “veils and clouds” from religion so as to “seize in itself” the rational truth thereby concealed. They could consequently “do without the religious form . . . divest themselves of it like a threadbare garment.” According to the Cousinian philosophy of history, mankind progressed in the direction of including increasingly more philosophers in its ranks. The ideal, though probably unattainable goal of history would thus be the total obsolescence of religion, the transformation of its content into a rational form accessible to everyone. Nowhere more than in this Cousinian utopia did Maret see proof of Cousin’s perverse drive to naturalize religion, stripping it of the mystery so integral to Catholicism.[^61]

In sum, Maret regarded the nominal presence of the Christian God in the Cousinian philosophy as entirely misleading. For in this system no appropriately hierarchical distance separated man from God. In the final analysis, the divine attributes depicted by Cousin were indistinguishable from those of the human psyche, just as Christian mystery was identical to rational philosophy. Cousin’s heresy was, according to Maret, twofold: equating the status of Creator and creation, and reducing religious mystery to psychology. As we will see, Renan would eventually embrace Cousin’s second heresy—having perhaps, ironically, learned about it from Maret.

### Mid-Nineteenth-Century Seminary Psychology

Since Cousinian psychology was off bounds for Catholics, one might assume that a great nineteenth-century seminary such as Saint-Sulpice would either dispense with psychology entirely, or teach some medieval version of it, or perhaps press into service Bishop Bossuet’s De la connaissance de Dieu et de soi-même (1st ed., 1722) which, as its title plainly indicated, had the distinctly Catholic virtue of tying human self-knowledge inextricably to knowledge of God. The first strategy was rejected. As Renan described the seminary curriculum in a letter to a boyhood friend in the fall of 1841, “In the first year we have logic and theodicy, together with mathematics; in the second, psychology (la Psychologie) and morals, together with physics.”[^62] To some degree, the last strategy was followed. The older generation of teachers at Saint-Sulpice, who had studied theology at the pre-Revolutionary Sorbonne, were so steeped in Bossuet that the young Renan could almost believe that they had once literally sat at the Bishop’s feet.[^63] Renan himself read avidly in a nineteenth-century edition of Bossuet’s Oeuvres and in his notebooks exclaimed, “God, what a psychologist that man was!”[^64]

More surprising is the additional reliance of certain Catholic educators, like those at Saint-Sulpice, on the so-called Scottish common-sense psychology of the eighteenth century represented by Thomas Reid and Dugald Stewart. By the 1840s, such educators even had at their disposal new editions of the works of these thinkers produced by a devout translator, the abbé Pierre-Hippolyte Mabire. There is clear symbolism in the fact that Mabire’s translation of Dugald Stewart’s moral philosophy, which Renan used (and copiously annotated) while at Issy, as well as his book of excerpts from Thomas Reid, redid the earlier, pioneering translations of a Cousinian, Théodore Jouffroy.[^65] Mabire explicitly presented them as such, and the Catholic press crowed that the good abbé’s translations, while fully as accurate and elegant as those of Jouffroy, offered an important additional advantage: because of an apparatus of notes signaling and countering doctrinally impure assertions in the original text, they could be “placed in the hands of young people without the slightest danger.” Furthermore, continued the Ami de la religion, Mabire’s introduction to his translation of Stewart’s Outlines of Moral Philosophy stood in stark opposition to Jouffroy’s famous long 1826 introduction to his translation of the same work, an introduction that had (as seen in Chapter 5) served as a kind of primer of the new Cousinian philosophy for many contemporaries. Whereas Jouffroy had tacitly presented philosophy as the only available source of ultimate truth (in a work officially adopted for use in the elite state secondary schools, no less!), Mabire stressed that philosophy could never entirely supplant Christian revelation.[^66] By latching on to the Scottish common-sense philosophy, in other words, French Catholics were simultaneously rejecting Cousinianism and appropriating for their own ends a type of psychological thought that had been an indispensable way station en route to Cousin’s eclectic synthesis. How can this seemingly anomalous Catholic preference be explained?

The role of Scottish common-sense philosophy in the genesis of Cousinianism is well known. Cousin’s mentor Pierre-Paul Royer-Collard is supposed to have happened upon the work of Thomas Reid when, in the aftermath of the Revolution, he was seeking to replace the then prevalent sensationalism with a philosophy conducive to political stability. Reid qualified for this purpose because he explicitly denied the sensationalist trope depicting mind as a tabula rasa imprinted by sensory experience; instead he contended that, independently of experience, mind was always already equipped with certain structures that formed the basis of our reasoning processes. These he labeled common sense, a term intended to have both a technical and a vernacular meaning. From Royer-Collard’s perspective, Reid thus restored the immateriality of mind and all the salutary moral consequences that flowed from it; and, since the common sense he postulated was possessed by all, he also supplied an a priori basis for social consensus that would, in the nature of things, militate against revolutionary upheaval.

Although Cousin applauded the gains made by Reid and his Edinburgh colleagues and acknowledged their superiority to the sensationalists, the Scots had not, in his view, gone far enough. Their work urgently needed the supplement of German idealism. “The Scottish philosophy will prepare you for the German,” Cousin told his Sorbonne audience in 1829.[^67] Psychology was not, in other words, a self-sufficient discipline for Cousin. As we have seen many times, its great advantage was its capacity to function as the stepping stone to ontology and metaphysics, thereby placing the sociopolitical order on the most solid of possible foundations. By the 1840s, when his philosophy was under heavy fire from Catholics, Cousin reiterated this position with a slightly new accent. “The fundamental idea on which my friends and I rely [is] the following: that the light of high metaphysics is in psychology.” One could embrace a “deep psychology” such as his own and use it as a point of departure to reach “a great moral and religious philosophy liberal in orientation.” Or one could embrace a “superficial psychology” such as sensationalism that, inimical to metaphysics, would produce “atheism.” Or one could, like the German idealists, adopt no clearly articulated psychology at all, and thus end up mired in cloudy speculation, in a “hypothetical metaphysics,” as Cousin discreetly called it.[^68] In other words, it was necessary to supplement the Scottish philosophy by the German, rather than adopting the German directly, because that path alone ensured arrival at a metaphysics that, by dint of being grounded in psychology, far surpassed its German counterpart.

At Saint-Sulpice in the 1840s, the Scottish philosophy was also prized for its stance on the immateriality of mind, but it otherwise occupied a rather different niche than it did in the Cousinian canon. Its resident purveyor was the abbé Jacques-Alexis-Augustin Manier, who served as philosophy professor at the seminary from 1835 to 1848. As affectionately described by Renan, Manier had gravitated to the Scottish philosophy because of its unexpected harmony with his religious faith. Indeed he recommended it on that account to the scrupulous and perplexed young Renan. “‘Scotland reassures [rational minds fearful of straying from religious doctrine] and leads to Christianity,’ he used to say to me, pointing out that the good Thomas Reid was at the same time a philosopher and a minister of the Holy Gospel.” Although an otherwise logical thinker, Manier resisted the recognition that his embrace of the Scots conflicted with the rest of his belief structure. He simply pretended not to notice that the Scottish postulation of common sense as the innate given of humanity flew in the face of the Sulpician belief in the depravity of man’s fallen condition. He bolstered his fondness for the Scottish position by reference to the text from the Book of Job that credited God with having “put wisdom in the entrails of man.” Through his long, habitual commerce with the Scots, he had even, Renan observes, acquired their “great aversion to metaphysics.”[^69]

Indeed, if the antimetaphysical impulse of the Scottish philosophy was its chief deficit from Cousin’s viewpoint, the lacuna that cried out for German supplementation, the very absence of metaphysics seems to have been one of its chief recommendations for French Catholics. As the abbé Mabire wrote in his introduction to his translation of Dugald Stewart:

> We have had one idea constantly in mind while translating the Esquisses. Philosophy can never in itself constitute a complete science [emphasis in the original]. It is our wish that it come closer to theology, neither fearing nor suspecting it. The two are noble sisters, both daughters of heaven, heiresses to that same celestial patrimony—the truth—which they share and of which each possesses only a part.[^70]

By refraining from metaphysical speculation, then, the Scots seemed to a cleric like Mabire to offer a philosophical psychology that could be treated as an up-to-date and circumscribed field of specialized knowledge. Thus safely enclosed and decidedly incomplete, it was authoritative within its own boundaries and, at the same time, invited collaboration with Catholic metaphysics. Mabire’s obvious, if unnamed, point of comparison was the Cousinian variety of psychology, which made a virtue of overflowing its boundaries and, by generating a metaphysics, seemed to style itself as competitor to Catholic theology.

Inculcating the traditional vie intérieure religieuse, Renan’s seminary education did not, then, deprive him of all training in secular psychology but instead equipped him with some of the very tools that Cousin had used to construct his own psychological doctrine. While forbidding Cousinianism, it gave its pupil a surprisingly thorough introduction to it.

### Renan Adumbrates a Secular Interiority

It was against the background of the vociferous Catholic polemic against Cousin that the young Renan struggled privately to find a suitable language for conceptualizing and organizing his inner life. During the years 1843–45, when he was simultaneously studying at Saint-Sulpice and worrying about his commitment to the Church, his copious personal jottings demonstrated a striking proclivity to use the word “psychologie” and its derivatives, “psychologique” and “psychologiste”—a relatively unusual idiom for his day and one that he had almost certainly picked up from the abbé Manier’s psychology course as well as from his indirect exposure to the philosophy of Cousin. Renan pointed to Cousin as one of his likely sources for the idiom when, finally reading his 1818 course, probably in 1845, he noted, “A remarkable thing about the method of Monsieur C. is that he always remains within the psychological viewpoint. . . .”[^71] “Psychologie” did not have a stable meaning for Renan at this transitional moment. He seems rather to have been experimenting with all its possible meanings in a double quest: to augment the available modes of articulating his own mental and emotional experience; and to develop a new category of scientific analysis that he could apply to the external phenomena of language, culture, and history.

A key text for demonstrating Renan’s fixation on the domain of the psychological during this period and for attempting to fathom his definition of that domain is a notebook from the end of 1843 and the beginning of 1844 that he entitled “Observations et faits psychologiques” (Psychological Observations and Phenomena). The expression “fait psychologique” is repeatedly used in the notebook as well as in Renan’s other manuscripts of the period, becoming a signature concept much like “méditation psychologique” in Maine de Biran’s journal. Renan is given to beginning notebook entries with the formula, “It is a very remarkable [or very important, or very singular] psychological phenomenon that . . .” So routine does this formula become that he even places under the rubric “a very remarkable psychological phenomenon” his observations about the strategy of the French clergy in their fight against the educational monopoly of the state: that they have done an ideological about-face and have availed themselves of “liberal ideas.”[^72]

A proponent of Baconian induction, Renan has numbered the entries in the notebook, and consequently the faits they contain, to enable easy comparison between the data he has gathered. Thus, “Monsieur Billion [one of Renan’s fellow seminarians] observed in himself a phenomenon (fait) analogous to that in #17.”[^73] Renan seems to have hatched the plan for an exercise in concerted and documented self-observation while reading Dugald Stewart and, for purposes of his notebook, to have extended that initial plan to include observation of the behavior of other people.[^74] That Manier’s psychology course included both the “rational” and “experimental” varieties—the former defined as treating the nature, origin, and ends of the human mind (âme) by means of deduction from self-evident principles and the latter as treating the faculties of the human mind (âme) by means of observation—suggests how indebted to the seminary curriculum were, ironically, Renan’s earliest scientific-psychological researches.[^75]

The “faits psychologiques” lumped together in the notebook under that single, all-purpose rubric are, in fact, of very disparate sorts. At the one end of the spectrum are manifestations of the link between the mental and the physical in a single human organism and, at the other, mental traits ascribed to whole peoples or historical periods. Attempting to impose on them a taxonomical clarity that Renan himself found unnecessary or actively resisted, I came up with the following provisional list of his different types of faits psychologiques, arranged in ascending order from the biological to the historical:

(1) Psychosomatic reciprocity, or, as Renan puts it, the “astonishing” impact of a psychological state (état psychologique) on the body—For example, Renan notes that a good mood invariably manifests itself by a relaxed upper lip, a bad mood by a tightened one; when he wanted to hide a feeling of elation from others at the seminary, he was annoyed that, unable to control the musculature of his upper lip, he willy-nilly divulged his inner state.[^76]

(2) Dreams and the thin line between dreaming and wakeful consciousness—For example, Renan notes that one morning when he overslept, he awoke fully only after the church bell had stopped ringing; for the duration of the ringing he was unsure whether he was dreaming of the sound or actually hearing it.[^77]

(3) Proofs of the applicability of a sensationalist or common-sense faculty psychology to the phenomena of everyday life—For example, Renan decides that the efficacy of scratching as an antidote to itching can be explained by the displacement of the faculty of attention onto the new, deliberately added sensation. He similarly concludes that one’s capacity to feel a throbbing in a body part chosen at random is due not to the faculty of will moving the blood there (his earlier hypothesis) but to a focus on that body part by the faculty of attention, which is normally absorbed with external stimuli rather than with the throbbing of blood that is in fact occurring at every moment everywhere in the body. He chalks up to the sensationalist principle of the “association of ideas” the observed fact that the assembled seminarians of Saint-Sulpice laughed at a tale of a philosopher of antiquity who threw his money into the sea as symbol of his intention to devote himself to the pursuit of wisdom. Had another chain of associations been tapped, Renan opines, the story would have provoked a different response: “If a saint doing the same thing had been described, we would have been filled with admiration.”[^78]

A significant subcategory of these applications of psychological theory concerns the power of habit, a phenomenon well studied by both sensationalist and Scottish common-sense psychologists.[^79] Renan notes that the habit of maternal love has become so ingrained in his own mother that it “overflows its natural objects,” causing her reliably to single out little children from a perceptual field in which there are “a thousand things to notice.” An incident in which a sailor bursts out in anger against Renan for having tossed a stone in the direction of a boat (not the sailor’s own) provokes a meditation on the attachment of workers to the tools of their trade, an attachment rooted in the habit of long, repeated use.[^80]

(4) Collective psychology of small groups—While most of Renan’s examples concern the individual, and a great many concern himself taken as a valid representative of the human species,[^81] he also speculates occasionally on what might be called small-group dynamics. Thus, for example, he ponders a remark of Bossuet to the effect that the rule of silence in certain religious communities facilitates fraternal feeling among the members. He notes that he has more affection for some of his own condisciples when he speaks infrequently to them and explains this “very remarkable psychological phenomenon” by the fact that people living in such close proximity easily get bored with one another and need, paradoxically, to maintain distance in order to preserve their ties. He begins to wonder about the implications of this finding for “ordinary life” outside of the cloister, where keeping to oneself would be seen as a sign of indifference.[^82]

(5) At the far end of the spectrum are those phenomena to which Renan gives the label psychologo-historique. Thus, he identifies three features of the “barbarism of the Middle Ages” that distinguished Western Europeans of that era from “other barbarous nations” and presaged their later progress. These three are the rational spirit of the scholastics, which entailed a “prodigious extension given to the faculty of deduction,” and the central place accorded two ideas: that of law and that of loyalty and honor.[^83]

Thus classified, Renan’s faits psychologiques offer an informal inventory of the various meanings of the psychological in the early 1840s. It is the last meaning that Renan would mine most intensively in his subsequent professional career. As Pierre Janet codified the received wisdom at the beginning of the twentieth century, (using as his vehicle a lycée manual of philosophy that went through numerous editions), the mature Renan sought to ground a science of psychology not in introspection but, following positivist principles, in the observation of external phenomena. Yet unlike Auguste Comte, who identified the relevant external phenomena as the anatomical and physiological features of the brain, Renan identified them in cultural terms, as the language and history of peoples.[^84] It is this meaning of the psychological that Renan was already developing in his 1845 “Essai psychologique sur Jésus-Christ,” an early sketch for his pioneering Vie de Jésus (1863). The title of the 1845 essay is somewhat misleading for those who do not share Renan’s capacious definition of the key word: the psychology in question is not the personal one of Christ in his human incarnation but that of the historical period from which he sprang. (“History is, in effect, only the psychology of humanity,” Renan declared in this manuscript.) How, Renan wanted to know, could the sublimity of the Gospel have arisen from the same morally debased Judaic culture that produced the Talmud? Since ordinary “psychological laws” could not explain such an anomalous outcome, he solved this puzzle by resorting to what he called “extraordinary psychological laws.”[^85]

Although Renan’s mature position on the constitution of a psychological science would thus reject introspection as its appropriate method, it is clear that, at least at the critical juncture when he transferred his religious vocation to the scientific pursuit of truth, introspection was still his natural medium and an essential part of his daily life. An entry in his notebooks from the period June 1845-December 1846 attests quite powerfully to that introspective proclivity and to the multiple purposes it served:

> Strange phenomenon, that shows that we measure time by internal memory. When I listen, when I attend a course, for example, the professor will sometimes stop speaking and my reflections will rapidly pursue some object during his brief silence, so that when he resumes speaking, it seems to me that I have been awakened and that he was silent for a long time. I measure the time elapsed by the thoughts that have filled the interruption.

He then caps this self-reflexive maneuver with a reflection on the fact that he is engaging in it. “It is a consolation for me to notice that, amidst the cruel circumstances that torment me”—he is referring to his recent departure from the seminary—“I still have enough courage and enough faith in science to pursue my speculative line of thought so dispassionately.”[^86] Not only, then, does Renan have a natural inclination to turn inward. He also uses his observations of his own mental processes as grist for psychological theorizing, a disciplined scientific endeavor that in turn (to adopt a psychoanalytic idiom) acts as a defense against the tumult of his emotions. Interestingly, Renan’s own note to this journal entry indicates that it was written in the context of his attendance at the course of the generically Cousinian philosopher Adolphe Garnier.[^87] Renan was, then, the ideal type of the Cousinian pupil, actively constructing a psychological science on the basis of his own interior observation.

During this fluid, transitional period, Renan’s psychological researches were not wholly secular. He still allowed himself occasional recourse to religious explanation, to an introspection mediated, in classical Catholic fashion, by reference to supernatural entities. Thus at one moment he expressed the view that, in a world without divine grace, the study of human psychology would be doomed to futility from a practical standpoint. “Necessity of grace. To cure man’s heart, one would have to cure his reason, and to cure his reason, one would first have to cure his heart. Impossible to exit from that [vicious] circle without external help.”[^88] At another moment, a “psychological phenomenon that I have experienced for a long time” convinced him of the existence of “the devil” as an entity affecting the human psyche. When distracted during an “exercise of piety,” he always found the source of the distraction to possess an “inexpressible charm, oh! but inexpressible.” Yet if he returned to it at a moment when involvement in it was licit, he found it utterly lacking in appeal. “That seems entirely inexplicable to me on natural grounds, and I see in it one of the strongest proofs of the Christian religion, as an induction made from the existence of the devil and of the devil’s repugnance for the practices of that religion.”[^89]

A striking feature of this heady, still unorganized mix of psychological theorizing is the absence of self-talk. Renan introspected in a fundamentally pointillist manner, registering and explaining discrete psychological phenomena; he showed no interest in that bounded totality called the self. As we continue to follow the path of his psychological speculation, we will want to find out how he reacted to the Cousinian concept of the moi. We will also want to find out if he sought a systematic reconciliation of the secular and religious versions of interiority, in place of the simple commingling of the two that seemed to satisfy him initially, and whether Cousinianism was useful to him in that task.

### Rendezvous with Cousin

Cousin’s doctrine was part of Renan’s intellectual universe even when he knew it only from secondhand accounts. Already in the notebook entitled “Observations and faits psychologiques,” he announced that “Monsieur Cousin [had] well analyzed the progress of the human mind in the search for truth”; he had correctly asserted that “it proceeds from an exclusive view of one aspect of the truth, bracketing the rest,” and eventually arrives at a juste-milieu taking into account all aspects. Mulling over this Cousinian proposition, Renan deemed it valid when applied both to the individual intellect and to the mental development of humanity in general. As usual, he reasoned from introspection: “I have experienced it in myself.” He analogized the mental process to the physical oscillations of a pendulum: “From one extreme it passes to another extreme, less distant from the middle; from that extreme to the opposite one, less distant still. . .”[^90]

When, around 1845, Renan finally read Cousin’s 1818 course, its “wingèd phrases” transported him considerably less than his fond remembrance of the event four decades later would suggest. Judging from his copious notes, reading Cousin inspired no epiphany in him: in all likelihood, long prior familiarity with the basic outlines of the philosophy made his encounter with the actual text anticlimactic. Perhaps, too, the exalted nature of his expectations—this was, after all, an author banned by his seminary teachers!—inevitably produced disappointment and hence an accentuation of what he perceived as Cousin’s failings.

Thus, he played down the novelty of Cousin’s views, frequently assimilating them to the insights of the Scottish common-sense philosophers. He complained that some of Cousin’s criticisms of the Scots did not hold water, and he reserved the colorful outburst “Charlatanism!” for a place in the text where he believed Cousin to be following the Scots even as he pretended to be improving on their allegedly flawed position.[^91] We can assume, given this fondness for the Scots, that he sided with the conception of Reid and Kant as represented by Cousin—“they create the world by the moi”—against that of Locke and Condillac—“they create the moi by the world.”[^92] Yet he took pains to observe that Cousin’s anti-sensationalist arguments were not in themselves convincing: “The proofs he adduces against Locke are of an almost comical inexactitude and vagueness.”[^93] His response to Cousin’s religious positions was no more favorable. On the issue of pantheism, he shared Maret’s opinion that this label suited Cousin’s philosophical doctrine: “Pantheist ideas very evidently come through in this lesson. . . . He who does not know the pantheism of Monsieur C. lacks the key to his ideas.” Unlike Maret, however, Renan apparently did not think that this pantheism fully discredited Cousin’s philosophy, making its every aspect worthless or dangerous. What seemed to bother him more was the cynicism with which Cousin vehemently denied the charges of critics like Maret and his imagined readiness to “mock [in private] those who believe his protestations [that his philosophy is not pantheistic].”[^94] In addition, steeped in the latest philology and Hebraic studies, Renan took pleasure in pointing out that Cousin, lacking such erudition, erroneously repeated the old saw that Christianity grew out of the culture of Greek antiquity. “The Greek spirit contributed nothing to the birth of Christianity but a good deal to its development. The root of Christianity is solely in Judaism. That is a fact, and the assertions of this entire century will do nothing to change it.”[^95]

Faced with Cousin’s novel psychological propositions, however, the otherwise prickly Renan became oddly phlegmatic. In a two-part format divided into a summary of each of Cousin’s lectures and a list of his own rejoinders to the arguments presented, he duly recorded Cousin’s doctrine of the moi and its distinctive identification of selfhood with free activity and will. As we know well, this aspect of Cousin’s philosophy was hardly anodyne. So offensive, in fact, did Catholic critics find it that, accusing the Sorbonne maître of deifying the human self, some even referred sarcastically to his entire oeuvre as the “philosophy of the moi.”[^96] Renan, by contrast, said nothing; he failed to respond to the doctrine in either positive or negative terms.[^97] To this strange silence must be added his equally peculiar reaction to one of Cousin’s related claims: that the idea of cause originates in the moi and, specifically, in the individual’s introspective awareness of the free activity of his own will. Renan did not comment on this claim either. But instead of merely ignoring it, he seems to have displaced his curiosity about it onto the psychohistorical plane. Prodded by Cousin’s thesis, he pondered not the human will but its divine counterpart:

> It would be intriguing to examine psychologically in what sense Christianity made us aware of the idea of cause through its dogma of providence and its precept of submission to the will of God, such as the saints have practiced it. To do so it would be necessary to study intensively the lives of the saints, which in fact form an invaluable repertory for the psychologist. . . .[^98]

It is hard to believe that Cousin’s theory of the moi held no interest for Renan. A far more probable interpretation of his silence in the one case and his deflected response in the other is that they expressed anxiety rather than indifference. Certainly some comments of his older sister Henriette tend in this direction. When Ernest began to confide in her his still tentative plans to leave the seminary, she wrote to him from Poland (where she had gone to serve in the household of a nobleman who had promised that the job would provide her with time and resources for study): “You suffer, my Ernest, in discovering personhood [personnalité, the term that Cousin used as a synonym for the moi] and ambition where your righteous and pure heart dreamt only of abnegation and devotion.”[^99] And as his determination to renounce his religious vocation grew stronger, she wrote that his most recent letter had given her “great joy because I see in it a finally emerging resolve, I find in it traces of that energy, of that force of will that I have so much desired for you and without which we remain all our lives only overgrown children.”[^100]

It is, then, Henriette rather than her brother who gives voice to the idea that part of Ernest’s crisis of vocation is a conflict between two opposing psychological modalities: bending to the will of God, or cultivating one’s own, human will. It seems safe to accept the accuracy of Henriette’s observations in this regard. Sharing, by his own testimony, Ernest’s “strong disposition for the vie intérieure,”[^101] her close relationship to her brother gave her privileged knowledge of him; moreover, she selflessly poured support, advice, and tenderness into her younger sibling as into a work in progress.[^102] On the basis of her remarks, we can only assume that Cousin’s concept of the moi aroused enormous ambivalence in the young Renan. It was easier for him to apply the Cousinian philosophy at a safe distance to the psychohistorical meaning of the Christian doctrine of the divine will than to apply it at close range to himself—and this despite the fact that he habitually looked to his own case as verification for the propositions of psychological theory.

Occasionally during this period of his life, Renan does speak of the self, even of his own self, in the egoistic manner so dear to Cousinian philosophy and so inimical to Bérullian Catholicism. In the fait psychologique cited earlier concerning the sailor’s anger at Renan’s tossing a rock at a boat, Renan goes on to explain that oddly strong reaction in a way consonant with, but much more Cousinian than, his initial explanation in terms of habit. A worker, he suggests, grows attached to the tools of his trade not only because of his habitual use of them but also because of a psychological mechanism whereby he identifies them with himself. In language reminiscent of Cousin’s justification of private property by the a priori existence of the moi, Renan speaks in this context of the “principle that identifies us with our property” (emphasis in the original). “We regard it as an extension of ourselves, and that is what binds us to it so powerfully.”[^103] Another of these rare instances of a fait psychologique recorded by the young Renan that muses on selfhood occurs in his notebooks from his Breton summer vacation of 1845, when his decision-making about his future connection to the seminary had come to a head. Encountering a small child that people say looks the way he looked at that age, he notes in one entry, “Ah, my nice past, I will never renounce you. That little child has had more effect on me than ten volumes of philosophy.” A few entries later he returns to the episode to theorize it further in terms of the self, to make an admission that might seem obvious but that is quite unusual and even a little shocking for Renan who, for all his introspection, does not often dwell on or even acknowledge the self. “Strange psychological phenomenon, that singularly lively affection that I felt for that small child, who is, it is true, quite good and sweet. But the true reason for my affection, I imagine, is that people say that he resembles me when I was his age. Upon hearing that, I assimilated myself to him, identified with him; and what I love in him is my past. . .”[^104]

During the critical period 1843–46, then—and this chapter is concerned only with those years—Renan seems to have been poised or suspended between self-abnegation and willfulness and, at the same time, between a religious and a secular vie intérieure. This liminal position accorded well with the pattern of life he adopted immediately after leaving Saint-Sulpice: although he would no longer devote his life to the Church, but rather to secular science, he had not ceased to be a practicing Catholic and still took the sacraments, noting the “very striking psychological phenomenon” that he “literally could not imagine” that the host was ordinary bread.[^105] He frankly viewed the faculty psychology of the common-sense school that he had learned at the seminary and that formed a large part of the conceptual scaffolding for his secular introspection as unable to accommodate the transcendent. He seems, in fact, to have reached the same impasse with respect to the Scottish psychology that Cousin had reached several decades earlier—that is, finding it wanting by dint of its inability to accommodate a metaphysical dimension. He expressed this insight in his own variant on the vocabulary of square pegs and round holes:

> The faculties that constitute our mind are like little boxes, molds of a certain shape—square, I suppose; and truths are bodies, also of certain shapes, that must be stuffed into these molds. But these truths are of all sorts of shapes, of completely distinct orders, square, round, etc. Now it is very evident that only the square ones will fit. The others, impossible! The square ones are phenomena, the round ones are metaphysical truths and mysteries.[^106]

Awareness of the tension between his religious and secular psychological modalities led Renan to try out, during the pivotal year 1845, at least two different strategies of integrating them. One such experiment took the form of a manuscript entitled “Psychologie de la confession,” probably prepared in March as a response to Michelet’s just published, attention-getting Du prêtre, de la femme et de la famille.[^107] Michelet’s book contained a virulent attack on confession, which it depicted as a cynical mechanism for the maintenance of Church power, a preying on the sensibilities of women (who chiefly availed themselves of this sacrament) to insinuate clerical influence into the heart of what should have been a patriarchal household. Renan, in turn, vigorously defended confession but, enacting the extreme ambivalence he felt toward the Church at this date and expressing his heartfelt desire to reconcile religion and science, he did so by using the tools of scientific psychology, including the Cousinian variety.

Thus Renan’s essay never even employs the term “sacrament.” Casting itself as a vérification psychologique of a traditional Church teaching (Renan has here adopted the very sort of analysis that Maret labeled as heretical in Cousin), it audaciously defines sin in Cousinian vocabulary as the revolt of the finite against the absolute, an error of a moi which, believing itself fully autonomous, neglects to regulate its actions according to the dictates of impersonal reason. The essay tacks back and forth between introspective data and psychological theory. With a richness of detail that could only be autobiographical in origin, Renan notes the extreme psychological “rigidity” of the sinner, the haughty inflexibility that renders him immune to self-reform. Only confession before one’s fellow man has the force to assail this posture; the humiliation that it brings about entails “a sort of heat that softens [the soul] and makes it more susceptible to the impressions of virtue.” An agonistic encounter occurs in the confession box: “Shaken in its pridefulness . . ., [the soul] vacillates, awaiting an impulsion that will determine the side to which it will fall. It is then that, one-on-one with the virtue and reason that speak to it, it opens itself of its own accord to their blows and astonishes itself by yielding to their attacks . . .”

Renan goes on to invoke Dugald Stewart’s theory of the association of ideas to explain the implications of this intense experience for personal development over time. “Nothing is more tenacious, as we know, than these associations when they are formed in circumstances where the soul is disposed to receive strong impressions. . . . Hence, among persons accustomed to confession, [one finds] a certain modesty that holds them back before the mere idea of great wrongdoing.” The sequence of confession-humiliation-reform achieves its psychological efficacy, according to Renan, not only by the stick but also by the carrot. Indeed the two are linked, in the positivist terminology Renan favored, by a psychological law. It is “one of the most remarkable laws of the human affective life to be able to taste no lively joy without having first purchased it through a painful preparation.” Thus the pain of confession produces a divine balm: an “inexpressible sweetness” such that “all who have tasted it attest without hesitation [that it] is worth more than anything.”[^108]

Renan may have been personally satisfied with this syncretistic attempt to justify an orthodox religious practice with a scientific method. But whatever pleasure he took in his work was severely diminished when he exposed it to the evaluation of a superior at the seminary. A comment penciled at the top of the manuscript in handwriting not Renan’s own declared: “Basically good. Too much pretension at depth, producing some false and extravagant consequences.”[^109] We know Renan’s response to this dismissive criticism because he wrote about it, and apparently about a subsequent conversation with the same superior, in his private notebook:

> A curious fact to relate in the history of philosophy: in the middle of the nineteenth century, the use of the psychological method has been accused of “pretension at depth” and of ridiculous neologizing, at the Seminary of Saint-Sulpice, in Paris. One must acknowledge that the circulation is quite slow in certain parts of the human body.[^110]

The sardonic, almost mock-heroic tone of this entry is noteworthy (the commas before and after “at the Seminary of Saint-Sulpice” modulate the pace, making each successive revelation more incredible) as is the fact that Renan has chosen to characterize his essay as a “use of the psychological method” tout court. Renan, we can surmise, experienced this rejection bitterly, and he summoned all his artfulness to protect himself, even implicitly analogizing the Church to an atrophied limb of an otherwise vital social organism. What he had offered his superior was, after all, not an idle speculative exercise but an urgent attempt to reconcile the two institutions to which he was most committed—the Church and science—and, related to them, the two different modes of access to the vie intérieure to which he had become accustomed.

In the summer or fall of 1845, he made another attempt at integration in the notebook entry beginning with the arresting sentence quoted earlier in this chapter: “Here is my fundamental principle of the religious inner life.” That entry, like much of the material in Renan’s youthful manuscripts, is neither crystal clear nor fully worked out. Tellingly for our purposes, it is shot through with references to Cousin, who is, moreover, represented with the blatant inconsistency that befits a highly charged object. Renan alternately blames the Sorbonne maître for demoting the religious to an isolable aspect of human nature and praises him extravagantly for having devised a system in which the apparent opposition between the secular and the religious is erased. The passage, a self-contained paragraph for which Renan supplied no context, deserves to be quoted in its entirety:

> Here is my fundamental principle of the religious interior life. The religious is not a faculty apart, a separate compartment or pigeonhole in man (as Cousin and [the abbé] Bautain seem to construe it, Cousin by smothering it under the others, Bautain by smothering the others under it.) It is rather a facet of everything, of all duties, of every exercise of the faculties, etc. If the first point of view is admitted, what is called for is the theory of our harshest mystics, of Monsieur Olier, etc. Cut up, slice the human being and leave only the religious elements. For the rest not being religious, and only the religious having real value, what remains is futile. Once these principles are admitted, it is only superficial people who could possibly cultivate science, the mind, take an interest in life, etc. The mystics regard them with pity and rightly so: for [this way of life] augurs in them a weak head, little rigor, a spineless moderation. But, according to the other viewpoint, everything in man must be cultivated and conserved, nothing renounced, but everything raised to the level of the religious. At this point, the sacred and the profane disappear. The distinction has meaning only for limited minds. Everything is sacred in one facet, in every facet, if you wish, profane in another. (See Cousin, Course of 1818, towards the end) The science of phenomena could correspond to the profane, and philosophy to the sacred, but it would be better to say that the two words lack meaning, like all words that express unreal distinctions.[^111]

As Renan prepared to leave organized religion behind, he apparently sought reassurance, even ultimate answers, from Cousin’s philosophy. He construed it as providing a warrant to believe that he did not have to choose between the traditional vie intérieure religieuse—here represented, not surprisingly, by Olier—and an inner domain produced solely by secular processes of introspection. Rather the distinction between the two could be dissolved and the pair magically reconciled by Cousin’s Gallic version of Hegelian Aufhebung. The reader of this ardent passage cannot help but feel that Renan was engaging in a bit of self-deceptive casuistry in his final hour and that, by identifying the sacred with philosophy, he had already thrown overboard the religiosity of his seminary years.

This chapter has traced Renan’s pathway from the effaced or even completely “annihilated” Bérullian self (“The principle the [Sulpicians] preached the most was never to have oneself spoken of and, if one had something to say, to say it simply, as if hiding oneself,” Renan remarked retrospectively);[^112] through empirical self-observation under the aegis of the Scots, which served him in a transitional capacity; to something akin to a Cousinian self—secular-scientific, highly valorized, and willful enough to authorize a fundamental life decision. Renan did not, at least in 1845–46, live out that valorization of self directly. Rather he embraced the “psychological method” that he ascribed to Cousin, a method which made the workings of the self the primary level of reality and the one to which all the others could be legitimately reduced. The chapter has suggested the paradoxical relationship between Cousinian and Catholic interiority. On the one hand, true Catholic belief was incompatible with the Cousinian moi and could thus place Catholics outside the reach of the Cousinian hegemony that prevailed in secular society. On the other hand, Cousin’s metaphysical impulse could, as clerics feared, smooth the way from Catholic orthodoxy to the embrace of a garden-variety secular bourgeois self.

### NOTES

[^1]: 1. For recent treatments of Renan, see Maurice Olender, The Languages of Paradise: Race, Religion and Philology in the Nineteenth Century, trans. Arthur Goldhammer (French ed., 1989) (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992), esp. chap. 4; and Tzvetan Todorov, On Human Diversity: Nationalism, Racism, and Exoticism in French Thought, trans. Catherine Porter (French ed. 1989) (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993), esp. pp. 140–52, 219–29.

[^2]: 2. Ernest Renan to Henriette Renan, 17 January 1843, in Ernest and Henriette Renan, Lettres intimes, 1842–1845 (Paris: Calmann-Lévy, 1896), quotations on pp. 117–18, 120.

[^3]: 3. Ernest Renan to Henriette Renan, 11 July 1844, in ibid., p. 184.

[^4]: 4. Issy was not a separate seminary but rather the country annex of Saint-Sulpice where the seminarians spent two years before moving on to Paris. See Ernest Renan, Souvenirs d’enfance et de jeunesse, ed. Laudice Rétat (Paris: Garnier-Flammarion, 1973), p. 135.

[^5]: 5. Renan to his mother, 12 January 1842, in Ernest Renan, Lettres du séminaire, 1838–1846 (Paris: Calmann-Lévy, [1902]), pp. 164–65.

[^6]: 6. On the source of Renan’s earliest knowledge of Cousin, see Jean Pommier’s introduction to Renan’s notes on Cousin’s course of 1818, Cahiers renaniens, no. 3 (Paris: Nizan 1972): pp. 110–11. For Renan’s familiarity with the anti-Cousinian polemics of the clergy, see his Souvenirs, p. 157, which also indicates another source of Renan’s initially secondhand information about Cousin: a classmate who had studied at the Sorbonne before entering the seminary.

[^7]: 7. “Notes et remarques sur cours de M. Cousin sur les idées absolues du vrai, du beau et du bien,” BN MSS, Renan papers, n.a.f. 11481. On this manuscript and the problem of dating it, see note 91, later.

[^8]: 8. Jean Pommier, ed., “Travaux et jours d’un séminariste en vacances (Bretagne 1845),” Cahiers renaniens, no. 2 (Paris: Nizan, 1972): p. 197 for the quotation, my italics.

[^9]: 9. See “Index des noms propres” in Oeuvres complètes de Ernest Renan, ed. Henriette Psichari, 9 vols. (Paris: Calmann-Lévy, 1947), 9: 1595.

[^10]: 10. The “Liste génerale de rédacteurs” in the sixth and final volume includes “Renan, orientaliste [E.R.].” See Dictionnaire des sciences philosophiques, 6 vols. (Paris: L. Hachette, 1844–52).

[^11]: 11. Ernest Renan, “De l’influence spiritualiste de M. Cousin” (1858), as reprinted in Oeuvres complètes, 2: 55–85, 79 for the quotation.

[^12]: 12. Renan, review of Paul Janet, Victor Cousin et son oeuvre in Journal des débats, 13 June 1885, as reprinted in Oeuvres complètes, 2: 1109–12, quotation on p. 1111.

[^13]: 13. Ernest Renan to Henriette Renan, 17 January 1843, in Lettres intimes, p. 119. Renan is referring to Cousin, Des Pensées de Pascal: Rapport à l’Académie française sur la nécessité d’une nouvelle édition de cette ouvrage (Paris: Ladrange, 1843); see that work’s Avant-Propos, pp. xxxiii–xxxiv, xxxviii.

[^14]: 14. Ernest Renan to Henriette Renan, 22 September 1845, in Lettres intimes, p. 300.

[^15]: 15. Ernest Renan, Cahiers de jeunesse, in Oeuvres complètes, 9: 64, para. 35.

[^16]: 16. Souvenirs, p. 137.

[^17]: 17. See, e.g., Souvenirs, p. 156, where he notes the logically inconsistent position of one of his teachers at Issy by saying, “He never dreamt that if, to find the true and the good, man had only to plumb the depths of his heart, then the Catechism of Monsieur Olier would crumble at its base.”

[^18]: 18. The catalog of the Bibliothèque nationale de France lists copies of twenty-four editions of the Catéchisme, of which five were published in the seventeenth century, one in the eighteenth century and, strikingly, twelve between 1800 and 1851. I have consulted the earliest of these nineteenth-century editions.

[^19]: 19. Ernest Renan to François Liart, 6 November 1841, in Renan, Correspondance générale, 2 vols. (Paris: Honoré Champion, 1995), 1: 253–54. At about the same date, another seminarian observed, “No more than on the pyramids does the scythe of Time encroach on Saint-Sulpice”; see M. Theron, “Le séminaire Saint-Sulpice au XIXe siècle d’après deux ouvrages récents,” Compagnie de Saint-Sulpice. Bulletin du comité des études, no. 25 (April–June 1959): 586–93, quotation on p. 591. See also Renan’s comment in the Souvenirs (p. 141) that in Saint-Sulpice after the Revolution, “the seventeenth century had a location in Paris where it continued without the slightest modification.”

[^20]: 20. See Theron, “Saint-Sulpice au XIXe siècle,” pp. 591–92; and Irénée Noye, “L’héritage bérullien dans la compagnie de Saint-Sulpice,” Bulletin de Saint-Sulpice, n.s. no. 22 (1996): 164–83, esp. 174ff.

[^21]: 21. Renan, Souvenirs, p. 137.

[^22]: 22. On the late nineteenth-century origins of the rubric “French school,” its subsequent popularization by the third volume of Henri Bremond’s influential Histoire littéraire du sentiment religieux en France, 11 vols. (Paris: Bloud et Gay, 1916–36), and the still lively debate over its suitability and defining characteristics, see Yves Krumenacher, L’école francaise de spiritualité: Des mystiques, des fondateurs, des courants et leurs interprètes (Paris: Cerf, 1998), chap. 1. I am grateful to Dale van Kley for introducing me to Bérulle.

[^23]: 23. See Bremond, Histoire du sentiment religieux 3, esp. pp. 461–62.

[^24]: 24. See Paul Cochois, “Etre sulpicien aujourd’hui dans un séminaire,” Bulletin de Saint-Sulpice, n.s. 9 (1983): 16–33, esp. p. 24.

[^25]: 25. This point is made by Bremond, Histoire du sentiment religieux 3: 64ff. See also “Etats de Jésus,” Dictionnaire de spiritualité ascétique et mystique, 17 vols. (Paris: G. Beauchesne, 1932–95), 4: col. 1403–1406 and “Intérieur de Jésus,” ibid., 7, pt. 2, cols. 1870–1877.

[^26]: 26. Bremond, Histoire du sentiment religieux 3: 65, 74.

[^27]: 27. Renan, Souvenirs, p. 109.

[^28]: 28. See Bernaud Pitaud and Gilles Chaillot, Jean-Jacques Olier, directeur spirituel (Paris: Cerf, 1998), p. 21; this work also includes a modern edition of the 1831 text, L’Esprit d’un directeur des âmes, ou maximes et pratique de M. Olier touchant la direction.

[^29]: 29. Ernest Renan to François Liart, 6 November 1841, p. 253.

[^30]: 30. Renan, Souvenirs, pp. 151–52.

[^31]: 31. Renan’s earliest known writings are the manuscripts edited by Jean Pommier and published as Ernest Renan, Travaux de jeunesse 1843–1844 (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1931). Those with exclusively religious content are drafts of sermons or comments on the Old Testament psalms; they thus provide no evidence that Renan was engaging in any kind of explicitly religious introspection. But negative evidence is always inconclusive, and we have, furthermore, no textual evidence at all from Renan’s two years at Issy.

[^32]: 32. Olier, Catéchisme chrétien pour la vie intérieure, new ed. (Lyon: Rusand, 1822), pp. 1–2. For a discussion of the English translation of Olier’s key term, anéantissement, see Lawrence B. Terrien, “Translating Father Olier: Some Reflections on the Project of Publishing our Founder’s Writings,” Bulletin de Saint-Sulpice, n.s., no. 22 (1996): 203–206.

[^33]: 33. The theme of self-annihilation runs through Sulpician piety. A biography of Olier by one of Renan’s Sulpician contemporaries even lists suspension of self-hatred as a spiritual lapse that Olier admonished members of his order to guard against through self-examination. [Etienne-Michel Faillon], Vie de M. Olier, fondateur du séminaire de S. Sulpice, 2 vols (Paris: Poussielgue-Rusand, 1841), 2: 316.

[^34]: 34. Olier, Catéchisme, pp. 17–18, 81, my italics. See also p. 137: “Jesus Christ is within us to sanctify us . . . and to fill all of our faculties with himself.”

[^35]: 35. Ibid., pp. 96–97, 99 for “déiforme,” italics in the original.

[^36]: 36. Ibid., pp. 101–2.

[^37]: 37. [Faillon], Vie de M. Olier, 2: 306–7. On Renan’s familiarity with this text, see Jean Pommier, Exposition Ernest Renan, “Souvenirs d’enfance et de jeunesse” (Paris: Institut pédagogique national, 1959).

[^38]: 38. Renan to his mother, 28 April 1843, in Ernest Renan, Lettres du séminaire, 1838–46 (Paris: Calmann-Lévy, 1902), p. 184.

[^39]: 39. Renan to Henriette Renan, 16 June 1843, in Lettres intimes, p. 138.

[^40]: 40. Olier, Catéchisme, p. 104, title of pt. II.

[^41]: 41. Ibid., p. 106.

[^42]: 42. Ibid., p. 147.

[^43]: 43. [Faillon], Vie de M. Olier, pp. 315–16.

[^44]: 44. Renan, Souvenirs, p. 144. The nineteenth-century Sulpician works cited in this chapter (those of Faillon and Manier) bear out Renan’s assertion: the author’s name, given in the catalog of the Bibliothèque nationale de France, is absent from their title pages. The anonymity rule apparently applies during the author’s lifetime only. Thus, all the seventeen-century editions of Olier’s Catéchisme in the B.N. were published after his death in 1657, and their title pages include his name; those of his works published before 1657 omit his name.

[^45]: 45. See Michel Foucault, “What Is an Author?” in Language, Counter-Memory, Practice: Selected Essays and Interviews, ed. Donald F. Bouchard (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1977), pp. 113–38, and Mark Rose, Authors and Owners: The Invention of Copyright (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993).

[^46]: 46. On the relationship of Olier and Le Brun, see Henry Jouin, Charles Le Brun et les arts sous Louis XIV: Le premier peintre, sa vie, son oeuvre, ses écrits, ses contemporains, son influence (Paris: Impr. Nationale, 1889), pp. 86–95.

[^47]: 47. [Etienne-Michel Faillon, ed.] Vie intérieure de la Très-Sainte Vierge: Ouvrage recueilli des écrits de M. Olier, 2 vols. (Rome: Impr. de Salviucci, 1866), 2: 419–23, my italics. The stained glass window dates from 1674 and bears a different caption than the engraving: “Regina cleri” (queen of the clergy); see Marguerite Huré and Valentine Cordier, “Les Vitraux de Saint-Sulpice,” in Gaston Lemesle, ed., L’église Saint-Sulpice (Paris: Bloud and Gay, 1931), pp. 115–23, esp. 117–18. The title of Le Brun’s original drawing is given in Jouin, Le Brun, p. 568, which also indicates the wide contemporary popularity of this image.

[^48]: 48. For the classic program in intellectual history that identifies authorial intention as the goal of the historian’s investigation, see Quentin Skinner, “Meaning and Understanding in the History of Ideas,” History and Theory 8 (1969): 3–53.

[^49]: 49. Jules Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire, M. Victor Cousin: Sa vie et sa correspondance, 3 vols. (Paris: Hachette, 1895), 2: 2; see, e.g., ibid., Cousin to Lamennais, 4 August 1825, p. 7.

[^50]: 50. Cousin to Lamennais, 4 August 1825 and 12 September 1825, in ibid., pp. 7–8, 14.

[^51]: 51. Maine de Biran, Journal, ed. Henri Gouhier, 3 vols. (Neuchatel: La Baconnière, 1954–57), 2: 303 (January 1821).

[^52]: 52. Abbé G. Bazin, Vie de Mgr Maret, 3 vols. (Paris: Berche et Tralin, 1891), 1: 73–74; and Louis Foucher, La philosophie catholique en France au XIXe siècle (Paris: J. Vrin, 1955), p. 156.

[^53]: 53. H. Maret, Essai sur le panthéisme dans les sociétés modernes (Paris: Sapia, 1840), pp. v–vii.

[^54]: 54. Ibid., pp. viii–ix.

[^55]: 55. Ibid., p. 4. Maret did not pioneer this usage but built upon the work of the abbé Louis Bautain, a former student of Cousin’s turned cleric; see Foucher, Philosophie catholique, pp. 149–50, 153.

[^56]: 56. Le comte de Saint-Priest, Moniteur universel, 24 April 1844, p. 1056. For an account of the 1844 legislative debate, see my “Foucault and the Post-Revolutionary Self: The Uses of Pedagogy in Nineteenth-Century France,” in Jan Goldstein, ed., Foucault and the Writing of History (Oxford: Blackwell, 1994), pp. 99–115, esp. 105–7.

[^57]: 57. See Alasdair MacIntyre, “Pantheism,” in The Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. Paul Edwards, 8 vols. (New York: Macmillan, 1967) 6: 31–35.

[^58]: 58. Maret, Essai, pp. 5–8.

[^59]: 59. See Maret, Essai, pp. 11–13, and his La religion et la philosophie, les philosophes et le clergé (Paris: W.-A. Vaille, 1845). This pamphlet is discussed in Claude Bressolette, L’Abbé Maret: le combat d’un théologien pour une démocratie chrétienne, 1830–1851 (Paris: Beauchesne, 1977), pp. 266–67.

[^60]: 60. Maret, La religion et la philosophie, pp. 11–14.

[^61]: 61. Ibid., pp. 14–15, 18.

[^62]: 62. Renan to François Liart, 6 November 1841, Correspondence générale, 1: 254.

[^63]: 63. Renan, Souvenirs, pp. 142, 166.

[^64]: 64. For the quotation, see Travaux de jeunesse, p. 44; the bibliography in ibid., p. 262, indicates that Renan consulted the 43-volume edition of Bossuet’s Oeuvres (Versailles: J. A. Leibel, 1815–19).

[^65]: 65. Dugald Stewart, Esquisses de philosophie morale, new translation preceded by an introduction by the abbé [Pierre-Hippolyte] Mabire (Paris: Librairie catholique de Périsse frères, 1841), esp. pp. ii–iii. On Renan’s use of this edition while a seminary student, see the bibliography of Renan, Travaux de jeunesse, p. 264, as well as the published version of Renan’s annotations, Ernest Renan, “Notes marginales aux Esquisses de philosophie morale de D. Stewart,” ed. Jean Pommier, Cahiers renaniens, no. 3 (Paris: Nizet, 1972).

[^66]: 66. Anonymous review of Mabire’s translation of Dugald Stewart, Esquisses de la philosophie morale, L’Ami de la religion. Journal écclésiastique, politique et littéraire 113 (1842): 481–86, esp. 484–85.

[^67]: 67. Victor Cousin, Cours de philosophie, 2 vols. (Paris: Pichon et Didier, 1828–29), 2: 556.

[^68]: 68. Victor Cousin, Pensées de Pascal, Avant-propos, pp. l–li.

[^69]: 69. Souvenirs, p. 156. For the identification of the Old Testament phrase that Renan quotes in Latin and for biographical information about Jacques-Alexis-Augustin Manier, see Jean Pommier, ed., Renan, Souvenirs d’enfance et de jeunesse (Paris: A Colin), p. 300, nn. 170 and 173.

[^70]: 70. Mabire, “Avertissement du traducteur,” in Dugald Stewart, Esquisses, p. iii.

[^71]: 71. ”Notes et remarques sur cours de M. Cousin,” f. 555v.

[^72]: 72. “Observations et faits psychologiques,” XL, in Travaux de jeunesse, pp. 41–42. Renan is referring to the clerical use of “freedom of instruction” as its battle cry against the Université. For other examples of Renan’s characteristic formula, see, for example, XI, XIV, XVI XXVII XL, LXXIV.

[^73]: 73. Ibid., XX, p. 35. For Renan’s Baconianism, see his “Notes sur D. Stewart,” in his Travaux de jeunesse, pp. 81–86.

[^74]: 74. Ernest Renan, “Notes marginales aux Esquisses de philosophie morale de D. Stewart,” p. 20: “It would be desirable for some observant psychologist (psychologiste observateur) to keep a journal of his main associations of ideas as well as of his dreams and of everything that he regards as having given rise to them; that would be a means to infer something about that subject.”

[^75]: 75. In his letters to Liart, Renan initially calls the course simply “psychology” but later expands the name to “rational and experimental psychology.” See Renan to Liart, 3 May 1842, Correspondance générale, 1: 301. Manier published both parts of the course, the former in Latin as “Psychologia Rationalis,” in [J.-J. Manier], Compendium philosophiae, 2 vols. (Paris: Firmin-Didot, 1847), 2: 257–368, the latter in French in [J.-J. Manier], Traité élémentaire de psychologie expérimentale (Paris: Firmin-Didot, 1849). The definition of the two parts of the course is given in the Traité, p. 2.

[^76]: 76. Renan, “Observations et faits psychologiques,” XVII, p. 34.

[^77]: 77. Ibid., XLIII, p. 42.

[^78]: 78. Ibid., LXXXVII, pp. 55–56; LXXXVIII, p. 56; XLI, p. 42.

[^79]: 79. Renan made marginal notes on passages on habit in Dugald Stewart’s Esquisses; see Pommier, ed., “Notes marginaux,” pp. 34–35. On habit in Idéologie, see George Boas, French Philosophies of the Romantic Period (Baltimore: John Hopkins, 1925), pp. 44–45.

[^80]: 80. Renan, “Observations et faits psychologiques,” II, p. 28; LXXXIX, p. 56.

[^81]: 81. On Renan’s belief in the validity of what he calls “psychological induction from oneself to others,” see ibid., LXXV, p. 52.

[^82]: 82. Ibid., XI, p. 32.

[^83]: 83. Ibid., LVII, LVIII, LIX, p. 47.

[^84]: 84. Pierre Janet, Manuel du baccalauréat. Seconde Partie: Philosophie, 6th ed. (Paris: Vuibert, n.d.), pp. 12–14.

[^85]: 85. Ernest Renan, “Essai psychologique sur Jésus-Christ,” Revue de Paris 27 (15 September 1920): 225–61, quotation on p. 234. For a discussion of this text, see Jean Pommier, “Un opuscule inédit de Renan,” ibid., 27 (1 September 1920): 52–62.

[^86]: 86. Renan, “Cahiers de jeunesse,” in Oeuvres complètes, 9: 69–70.

[^87]: 87. Garnier’s Précis d’un cours de psychologie (Paris: Hachette, 1831) and La psychologie et la phrénologie comparées (Paris: Hachette, 1839) more than justify this label, even though Renan recorded Garnier’s private criticisms of aspects of Cousin’s philosophy in the mid-1840s; see Cahiers de jeunesse in Oeuvres complètes, 9: 74–75, 145.

[^88]: 88. Renan, “Observations et faits psychologiques,” XC, p. 57.

[^89]: 89. Ibid., XIX, p. 35; for other instances of religious explanation of psychological phenomena, see IV, p. 28, and LI, p. 45.

[^90]: 90. Ibid., XXXVII, pp. 40–41.

[^91]: 91. Renan, “Notes et remarques sur cours de M. Cousin,” fols. 555v, 556v. The notes are undated, and their BN cataloguer has suggested the 1840s or 1850s as the probable date of composition. Textual evidence I gleaned from the notes, especially the numbering of the individual lessons, indicates that Renan was working from the 1836 edition of the lectures prepared by Adophe Garnier, who used the redactions made in 1818 by students from the Ecole normale, which they had at the time duly deposited with the maître. See Cours de philosophie professé à la faculté des lettres pendant l’année 1818 par M. V. Cousin sur le fondement des idées absolues du vrai, du beau et du bien (Paris: Hachette, 1836), Préface de l’éditeur, pp. vi–vii. That Renan did not use Cousin’s own published version of 1853 strongly suggests that he read the lectures before 1853. I am here accepting the dating of the manuscript by the Renan scholar Jean Pommier, who opts for late 1844 to early 1845 on the grounds that the letters “S.S.” appear atop the first page; Pommier takes this to mean that Renan produced the notes while still a seminarian at Saint Sulpice. See his editor’s introduction to the published version of the manuscript in Cahiers renaniens no. 3, pp. 110–11.

[^92]: 92. Ibid., fols. 554–554v.

[^93]: 93. Ibid., fol. 555.

[^94]: 94. Ibid., fol. 560v.

[^95]: 95. Ibid., fol. 553v.

[^96]: 96. See, e.g., Marie-Stanislas Rattier, Cours complet de philosophie, mis en rapport avec le programme universitaire et ramené aux principes du catholicisme, 6 vols. (Paris: Gaume, 1843–44), 1: 16–18.

[^97]: 97. Renan, “Notes et remarques sur cours de M. Cousin,” fol. 556, Summary of Cousin’s Lesson 4: “Thus are derived three faculties: activity, sensibility, reason. Activity is the basis of the moi; but on that basis are drawn sensation, which perceives the world, and reason, which perceives the truth.” See also fol. 559v, Summary of Cousin’s Lesson 6: “Unlike liberty, reason is not an individual faculty.”

[^98]: 98. Ibid., fol. 560.

[^99]: 99. H. Renan to E. Renan, 30 October 1842, in Lettres intimes, p. 106.

[^100]: 100. H. Renan to E. Renan, 5 August 1845, in ibid., pp. 257–58.

[^101]: 101. See Ernest Renan, “Ma soeur Henriette” (1862), in Oeuvres complètes, 9: 445–80, p. 447 for the quotation.

[^102]: 102. The correspondence between Henriette and Ernest is an extremely moving document, revealing two people intimately bound together in a single project: the self-realization of Ernest Renan. When Ernest leaves the seminary, the hardly affluent Henriette seeks to cushion his material insecurity by sending from Poland 1,500 francs payable to him at the Rothschild bank in Paris. See H. Renan to E. Renan, 16 September 1845, in Lettres intimes. This sibling soul-union was, of course, predicated on the nineteenth-century gender conventions that, denying self-realization as a legitimate goal for Henriette, freed her considerable energies for her brother.

[^103]: 103. Renan, “Observations et faits psychologiques,” LXXXIX, p. 56.

[^104]: 104. Renan, “Séminariste en vacances,” pp. 143, 145.

[^105]: 105. Renan, Cahiers de jeunesse V, 39.

[^106]: 106. Renan, “Observations et faits psychologiques,” XXXV, p. 39.

[^107]: 107. See Jean Pommier, “Les idées de Michelet et de Renan sur la confession en 1845,” Journal de psychologie normale et pathologique 33 (1936): 514–44. My account of this essay follows Pommier’s.

[^108]: 108. Ibid., pp. 539–42.

[^109]: 109. Ibid., p. 543.

[^110]: 110. Relying on the Renan manuscripts, Pommier cites this passage in ibid., p. 544. It has since been published in Renan, Cahiers de jeunesse, in Oeuvres complètes, 9: 18.

[^111]: 111. Cahiers de jeunesse, in ibid., 9: 64, para. 35.

[^112]: 112. Souvenirs, p. 144.
