## 7 A Palpable Self for the Socially Marginal: The Phrenological Alternative

I make no appeal to 14 in this country [France]. Here one is polite, social, agreeable, but we must not expect 14.

J. C. Spurzheim to George Combe, 1824

At the end of November 1839, an infernal machine—the same kind of device that had been used several years earlier in Fieschi’s attempted assassination of King Louis-Philippe—mysteriously exploded in the center of Paris, destroying a wall on a street adjacent to the Palais-Royal. The police soon decided that the crime had been politically motivated, the work of a left-wing secret society hostile to the July Monarchy. They based this conclusion on the fact that their chief suspect, whose tiny rented room in the Marais was found to harbor a cache of explosives, had previously been sentenced for placarding the city with “seditious” posters. The suspect was Antoine-Pierre Béraud, a young man of twenty-two enrolled at the Paris Law Faculty. The arrest of Béraud proved to be a colorful affair. According to the Gazette des tribunaux, a police officer successfully recognized him at night even though he was “decked out in a workingman’s smock and was wearing a flowing blond wig to hide his close-cropped black hair.” Resisting arrest, he “pull[ed] up his smock with one hand [and] tried to arm himself with the pistol and kitchen knife tucked into his belt.” A crowd gathered, illuminated by gaslight, and “as was usual for the public” in such situations, cheered him on in his defiance of authority; only the arrival of other police officers sealed his fate.[^1] Several years later, after imprisonment for the infernal machine episode had converted him to more pacific ways, Béraud turned up in Moulins, a town in the Auvergne. There he petitioned the local authorities for permission to teach a public course. The French bureaucracy operated with admirable efficiency, and a letter dispatched to Paris soon brought word that the request was to be denied, in part because the petitioner had a criminal record, in part because the proposed course, though “more or less scientific” in nature, was known to have “baneful tendencies.” What was the subject that Béraud wanted to disseminate among the Auvergnats? It was phrenology.[^2]

Though rebuffed in his pedagogical mission in Moulins, Béraud did succeed in propagating phrenology under more informal auspices. During the next five years, in visits to Burgundy, the Loire Valley, Alsace, and especially the West, he staged demonstrations of his phrenological skills, “eager,” as he put it in his handbill, “to spread with all our strength a science as great as it is useful” and “happy to offer our enlightenment to persons who wish to submit their heads to us.”[^3] In the revolutionary year of 1848, he published a long book on the applications of phrenology to philosophy, morals and, most significantly, socialism.[^4]

As curious and marginal a character as Béraud may seem, he was, in fact, entirely typical of the leadership of early nineteenth-century French phrenology. Other influential phrenological advocates had remarkably similar profiles. They hailed from petit bourgeois or working-class backgrounds (Béraud was the son of a Lyonnais grocer),[^5] had sought but not obtained professional credentials, and were activists in or sympathizers with the left-wing opposition to the July Monarchy.

Thus, like the failed law student Béraud, Auguste Luchet dropped out of the Paris Medical Faculty.[^6] The grandson of a Paris carpetmaker and the son of a Paris clerk, he subsequently pursued a career as a publicist, playwright for the boulevard theater, and author of popular novels, larding his literary and journalistic productions with references to phrenology and Fourierist socialist theory. He had his own brush with the law. In 1837 he was hauled before the royal court of the Pas-de-Calais on a press violation: the state’s prosecutor charged that an article on phrenology that Luchet had contributed to the Almanach populaire de la France “incited hatred among the different classes of society.”[^7]

Pierre Dumoutier, the son of a decorative craftsman in the Marais, first enrolled at the Paris Medical Faculty in 1814. He never received certification as a physician, but neither did he give up the quest: he took his first examination for the medical doctorate in 1836, when he was almost forty, and his fifth and last examination when he was almost sixty, but he apparently ran out of steam before writing the required thesis.[^8] Calling himself an “anatomist,” Dumoutier was a founding member of the Paris Phrenological Society and, during the 1830s, a well-known instructor of phrenology in the capital giving public courses unaffiliated with the state educational system. He seems to have been less politically radical than the others, or at least more intent on keeping his political views hidden from the authorities, for (in what must have been the pinnacle of his career) he was invited to take part in a government-sponsored voyage to the South Seas as the ship’s resident phrenologist in charge of observing the cranial configurations of primitive peoples.[^9] Despite this moment of glory, Dumoutier remained sporadically employed and decidedly marginal; some of the phrenological manuscripts in his hand that I have come across are written on the backs of unpaid bills.[^10]

To be sure, other noteworthy proponents of phrenology in this era were of bourgeois origin and regular enough in their habits actually to complete the professional training they started; but they, too, connected their advocacy of the new science to left-wing politics. Perhaps the most famous of this group was Ange Guépin, the democratic socialist from Nantes. While a beginning medical student at the Paris Faculty in the early 1820s, spending “four hours a day with my hands and nose in a cadaver,” Guépin was introduced to phrenology—not as a part of the official curriculum but as one of the extracurricular student enthusiasms of the day. Classmates brought him to the private course of Franz-Joseph Gall, the Viennese refugee living in Paris who had founded phrenology. A fascinated Guépin attended the course faithfully, every Thursday evening and Sunday afternoon, and reported to a boyhood friend that Gall put to the class such audacious questions as “Is there a separate cerebral organ of marriage?” and “Is marriage a purely civil act or a natural institution?”[^11] By the opening years of the July Monarchy, Guépin was using his post at the Nantes medical school to propagandize for phrenology, suggesting that schoolteachers aim their instruction at the “anterior lobes of the brain” in order to “render sociable the individuals who are today being led by our educational institutions into the debasement of egoism.”[^12] His adherence to phrenology would continue for the rest of his life.[^13]

The art critic Theophile Thoré, best known for his discovery of the seventeenth-century painter Vermeer, also falls into this category. The son of a well-to-do merchant, he received a law degree in Poitiers but abandoned his legal career in disgust (“never will I accept a life stupidly spent among stupid people”) to fight for radical political causes and to live by his pen in Paris. He construed journalism in lofty democratic terms as a kind of secular priesthood in which he would serve as an “intermediary between [abstract] thought and the people.” Living in a garret, he formed a close friendship with Dumoutier, and the two young men companionably studied phrenology together. He instructed his mother to sell his neglected magistrate’s robe for cash; whether or not she complied, it was the money she periodically sent him that enabled him to make ends meet. Partly as a potboiler, partly as a labor of love, he wrote a Dictionnaire de phrénologie in 1836 for a publisher who offered him an advance of 600 francs and a second 600 francs if the sales reached 2,000 copies.[^14] The carefully crafted entries indicate the connection of phrenology to both his aesthetic theory and his politics. They included one that identified Gall’s science as the “first element of art” because it revealed the “direct and constant relation between the inner life and the visible manifestation,” and another that grounded private property in the brain organ of acquisitiveness but nonetheless questioned the validity of the capitalist property sanctioned by nineteenth-century law codes.[^15]

As the exploits of this motley crew suggest, phrenology was a psychological discourse contemporaneous with Cousinianism but very different in every other respect: intellectual content, political affiliations, institutional organization, audience, and rhetoric. Where Cousin insisted first and foremost on the immateriality of mind, phrenology embedded mind in brain. Where Cousinian psychology supported constitutional monarchy, limited suffrage, and a middle-of-the-road politics that made stability its highest priority, phrenology typically allied, during the period of the July Monarchy, with republican and socialist movements intent on overturning the political status quo. Where Cousin’s psychology became entrenched, comfortably and powerfully, in the state educational system, phrenology hovered hungrily on the sidelines of the establishment. Where Cousinianism took all the male lycée students in France for its captive audience and soberly initiated this bourgeois elite-in-the-making into the arcane language and practices of introspection, phrenology used makeshift settings and a simple, swift, and graphic pedagogy in an effort to win over the popular classes, who had been deliberately excluded from the lycées and hence from training in selfhood. Where Cousinians defined psychology as an exclusively male enterprise and debarred the female population from official instruction in the moi, phrenologists welcomed women into their courses. In terms of the sociology of its dissemination, phrenology was a decidedly compensatory psychology, offering its particular version of selfhood to those whom the Université had disdained.

Small wonder, then, that the appearance on the scene of an active phrenological movement prompted the Cousinians to redefine their enemy or, at least, to define it more capaciously than before. In the same letter of 1829 in which Caroline Angebert called to Cousin’s attention the continued vitality of sensationalist psychology among “the masses” after its abandonment by the intelligentsia (see Chapter 4), she also warned of a fresh peril, bearing a family resemblance to the first. “Grafted by physiology onto the sensualisme of the previous century, a new materialism is advancing. It has for leaders and auxiliaries men of action, stirring up the crowd, which finds their principles as easy to grasp as their doctrines are easy to put into practice.”[^16] Left unnamed by Angebert, that new enemy was subsequently identified and scrutinized by other Cousinians in prominent, published texts. Adolphe Garnier’s 1839 La psychologie et la phrénologie comparées grew out of the author’s dialectical position that responsible adherence to any scientific theory required thorough examination of the theories opposed to it. Hence, Garnier told his readers, as a strong partisan of Cousin and Jouffroy he had no choice but to treat “the doctrine of Gall and his successors, a doctrine that, under the name of phrenology, has attained the highest celebrity, that has its own journals, its savant societies, its public courses. . . .”[^17] The manual of Cousinian philosophy coauthored by Amédée Jacques showed that, by 1846, the new dialectical couple had become standard pedagogical fare. In fact, Jacques’ textbook contrasts sharply with the master’s own writings in that sensationalism, Cousin’s Other par excellence, has been fundamentally displaced by this relative newcomer, equally inimical to the Cousinian project:

> In what secret recess of matter, in what obscure cranny of the brain, will the physiologist go to grasp foresight, memory, reason and, more generally, thought, which has neither shape nor form? Still, some physiologists have pretensions to accomplishing just that, and, under the time-honored (sic) title of phrenology, they have instituted a science destined to supplant psychology by substituting for the direct study of the intellectual and moral faculties of man [by means of consciousness] the easier and clearer description of their organs.[^18]

### Rudiments of the Scientific Theory

From the beginning, phrenology was a theory of cerebral localization possessing a strong semiotic component. Like the physiognomy of the Swiss pastor, Johann-Caspar Lavater, also in vogue in the early nineteenth century (and with which it was often coupled, or even confused),[^19] it emphasized the possibility of divining internal psychological traits through the semiotic exercise of scrutinizing external physical morphology: facial features in the case of physiognomy, and skull conformation in the case of phrenology. A “psychological hieroglyphic,” one late eighteenth-century German admirer of phrenology called the skull.[^20] But unlike physiognomy, which offered no explanation for the correspondences it registered between faces and personalities, phrenology based its reading of skulls on a full-fledged theory of the relationship between mind and brain.

Its founder, the Baden-born physician Franz-Joseph Gall, had, by his own account, embarked upon his career as a phrenologist with an accidental observation of a generically physiognomical sort: as a schoolboy and again as a university student, he noticed that those of his classmates who had extremely good memories, and thus typically bested him in scholastic examinations, also had prominent eyes.[^21] For Lavater, such a finding would have been an end in itself. But Gall probed further, seeking the cause of the phenomenon, and indeed of all particularly well-developed mental faculties, in cerebral structure. Working in Vienna with a young collaborator, the medical student Johann-Caspar Spurzheim, he hammered out his theory during the last decade of the eighteenth century. He posited that, far from being composed of homogeneous tissue (as was generally thought at this date), the human brain was divided into discrete organs, each controlling a single intellectual attribute or affective propensity. The volume of each of these so-called brain organs in a given individual was, according to the theory, responsible for the degree of strength of the relevant mental traits in that individual. Brain-organ volume could be discerned indirectly through an examination of the surface contours of the skull that housed them: hence Gall’s innovative procedure of making plaster casts of the skulls of his research subjects. It could be directly verified by a postmortem dissection of the brain itself, one conducted according to Gall’s distinctive procedure of respecting the natural folds of that organ instead of cutting it into parallel, geometrically regular sections.[^22] The relation between brain configuration and personality could then be corroborated by external evidence of the subject’s behavior in social situations, by tracing what would come to be called the subject’s “phrenological biography.”[^23]

Gall thus thoroughly integrated mind and brain, and the religious implications of this theoretical move soon excited controversy. Adversaries labeled his doctrine “materialist and fatalist,” a shorthand term of opprobrium that meant that, by situating human mental processes in brute, organic matter (the “materialist” maneuver), a given philosophy or science subsumed them under the determinist laws that governed all matter (the “fatalist” consequence). Moreover, these same critics charged, the philosophy or science in question denied the existence of the free will that God had bestowed upon human beings; in effect it threw up its hands helplessly in the face of human conduct, adopting the position that people had no choice but to be and do what they were and did.

Once applied to Gall’s doctrine, this double allegation inspired political sanctions. The Hapsburgs had initially supported Gall’s research, granting him privileged access to the state-run prisons and insane asylums where he avidly palpated skulls, molded them in plaster, and inquired into the social conduct of the persons to whom they belonged. Yet in 1802 Emperor Francis II sharply revised his opinion of his scientific client. He forbade Gall to continue to offer private courses in the realm, citing the tendency of his doctrine to subvert religion and morality. In response, Gall and Spurzheim took to the road with their large collection of plaster casts, lecturing their way across Western Europe and arriving in Paris toward the end of 1807. The freedom of instruction they enjoyed in the French capital prompted them to settle there, even though their teaching, which won numerous converts, soon gave rise in certain quarters to the same allegations that had been its undoing in Vienna.

### The Checkered Fortunes of Phrenology in France

The scientific marginality that phrenology eventually acquired under the July Monarchy and the affiliation with the popular movement that became an element of its identity were not foreordained. They resulted instead from a set of highly contingent circumstances. In fact, the fortunes of phrenology alternately waxed and waned in France after Gall’s arrival there; at times, victory seemed within its grasp.

Effectively exiled from Vienna, Gall was understandably eager to win legitimacy for his science in Paris. However, he found his quest thwarted not only by the irreligious connotations of phrenology but also, it seems, by the swift and effortless entrance of phrenology into popular discourse and the comic potential of its signature act of skull palpation. The arrival of Gall and Spurzheim in Paris immediately produced a wave of parodies. For example, a one-act comedy of 1808 called Monsieur Têtu (French for “stubborn,” with an obvious play on tête, or head), subtitled La Cranomanie (skull-mania), presented the story of the aptly named bourgeois paterfamilias Monsieur Dujour who, having long tried the patience of his family and servants with his enthusiastic adherence to all the scientific fads of the day, outdoes himself when he makes the choice of his daughter’s marriage partner dependent on a phrenological reading.[^24] Against the no doubt disheartening background of such parodies, many of which placed Gall in the same ignominious line of seductive charlatans that included Mesmer,[^25] he and Spurzheim actively sought the imprimatur of official science in 1808 by submitting a memoir on the anatomy of the brain to the Academy of Sciences.

The commission charged with assessing it, headed by Georges Cuvier, dealt the phrenologists an oblique but nonetheless forceful blow. They generously acknowledged the experimental contributions of the two researchers, especially their demonstration of an uninterrupted connection between the spinal cord and brain. Nevertheless, they hastened to add that this laudable anatomical finding had no bearing on Gall’s much better known doctrine of cranial bumps or, as the report referred to it in more dignified fashion, “the physiological doctrine that [Gall] espouses on the special functions of the different parts of the cerebral organ.” Indeed the commissioners simply placed that latter doctrine outside their purview, declining to comment on it at all. They held that its validity ultimately depended on “observations about individuals’ moral and intellectual dispositions” which, they noted disparagingly, “assuredly fall within the competence of no academy of science.” The degree to which the public was cognizant of Gall’s findings was repeatedly mentioned by the commissioners, as if popularity in itself militated against scientific accuracy and respectability. Whereas, they said, Gall’s research remained as yet unpublished (a criterion for assessment by the Academy), the extent of his “oral teaching” had given it a degree of “publicity” comparable to that of a printed text. Certain aspects of it had even become “a topic of passionate discussion among people of all stations” and had thus “rendered [Gall’s] name popular.”[^26]

Deprived of validation by the Academy, but not censured either, Gall continued to lecture at the Athénée de Paris, an “anomalous” and “amateur” private institution (the characterization is that of a late twentieth-century historian of science) that had recruited him almost immediately upon his arrival in the French capital. Long associated both with political opposition and with a commitment to the technical application of science, the Athénée, founded toward the end of the Old Regime, was in the early decades of the nineteenth century enjoying a period of particular vitality and prestige. It was at the forefront of such new disciplines as physiology and political economy.[^27] It catered to a relatively affluent lay public, who purchased subscriptions for the privilege of attending its courses. It also had a reputation for philosophical materialism. After attending an evening physiology lecture there in January 1817, Maine de Biran noted in his journal that the speaker’s ramblings had received the “applause of the multitude.” Referring to the philosophical underpinnings of the lecture, he then asked acerbically, “What value can be attached to the approbation of ignorant men who let themselves be captivated exclusively by their senses?”[^28]

During the two decades that he lectured at the Athénée, Gall was much in demand by the fashionable upper classes of the capital for private consultations. He and Spurzheim quarreled around 1810 or 1811, for reasons that one historian has characterized as “less intellectual than emotional,” and parted ways soon after.[^29] Each man continued to devote all his efforts to the development of phrenology—the name for their science that Gall, disliking neologisms, always refused but that Spurzheim embraced.[^30] (Gall also adamantly rejected the name “cranioscopy” as focusing too exclusively on skull semiotics and glossing over the portion of the science concerning the anatomy and physiology of the brain.)[^31] In 1821, revealing his still unappeased longing for acceptance by the establishment, Gall submitted his candidacy for membership in the Academy of Sciences, but obtained only a single vote.

When the Restoration monarchy moved into its intensely clerical phase after the accession of Charles X in 1825, the prospects for phrenology dimmed drastically in France. As the peripatetic Spurzheim (who had already spent some years in Britain and would eventually leave for the United States) wrote in a personal letter from Paris in June 1825 in his imperfect but serviceable English, “Priesthood gaining every day more ground and authority in France, my exertion for Phrenology will be less and less appreciated there, nay my powers would be paralyzed. I therefore must think again of England.”[^32] Or, mulling over the same problem even more pessimistically and with greater resolve a year later:

> I come now to my plan as intended for the future. It was necessary for me either to give up lecturing on Phrenology and to stick to my practice of Medecin (sic) in Paris, or to give up my practice in Paris and to lecture in England. The happy period to unite both sorts of occupations is over in France and will not return in our days, the things growing worse every day and the spirit of Jesuitism spreading. . . .[^33]

Gall died in Paris in 1828, having lived out his final years in a political environment officially hostile to his creation. Nevertheless, contrary to Spurzheim’s forecast, the future soon brightened for phrenology in France. The Revolution of 1830 installed a liberal regime that was, at least at the outset, undaunted by phrenology’s materialistic taint and strongly inclined to exploit the potential of the young science for political benefit. Expectations ran high, almost absurdly so, one might say with the benefit of hindsight. In 1832 a bureaucrat in the Ministry of Commerce wrote to the French consul in London requesting, for purposes of comparison, information about the status of phrenology in Britain. Describing phrenology as a science that had in France already merited the “attention of our scholars and engaged the interest of the government,” he predicted extravagantly that its “results [could], in time, have an influence on societies as direct and not less profitable than that of the science of political economy”! Reflecting the famously French étatist bias, he inquired particularly into the steps that the British government had taken to foster the development of phrenology on the other side of the Channel.[^34] This functionary did not indicate exactly what “results” he expected phrenology to produce, but his analogy to political economy, as well as the fact that he served in the Ministry of Commerce, suggests that he envisioned an increase in the productivity of the French labor force once individuals had been set to work in the areas for which they possessed innate talents. For its part, the French diplomatic corps in Britain began collecting the desired data almost immediately.[^35]

By the time this letter was penned, a Paris Phrenological Society had already been formed, its founding members obviously emboldened by the Revolution of 1830 to bring into the open a scientific association that had for years been informal and partly subterranean. As early as October 1830, just months after the change of regime, a group of “medical and other gentlemen” approached Spurzheim about their intention to form a phrenology society, causing him to observe with evident relief, “There is now something to be done in Paris for phrenology.”[^36] In April 1831, the Ministry of Commerce responded promptly and affirmatively to the request of the Society for authorization to hold meetings, and in February 1833 the Ministry of Public Instruction responded similarly, and with similar alacrity, to the additional request that one of its members, Pierre Dumoutier (the superannuated medical student whom we encountered at the beginning of this chapter), be allowed to give a phrenology course, open free of charge to the general public.[^37] The Society, which counted 145 members at its inception in 1831, grew to 206 by 1834.[^38] No formal professional credentials were initially required for membership, although by 1843 candidates needed to submit a “work on phrenology or its applications” whose merit would be evaluated by a committee report and a vote of the plenum. The resultant inclusion of amateurs in the Society—which contributed to the pervasive image of phrenology as a popular endeavor—led one commentator to quip that anyone with “twenty-four francs [the annual dues] in his pocket could join.”[^39] Indeed, the “unlimited” number of members specified in the original regulations prevented the group from being officially recognized by the government as a savant society.[^40] Nonetheless, within a year the Society had spawned a journal devoted to its activities.[^41] So giddy were hopes for the institutionalization of Gall’s science at this juncture that rumors circulated about a plan afoot at the Ministry of Public Instruction for the imminent creation of a phrenology chair.[^42]

Ripples of the post-1830 liberation of phrenology were felt in the provinces as well. In the town of Troyes, for example, a certain Dr. Patin had received permission in 1828 to teach a free public course in popular hygiene. About a year later, however, a colleague denounced him to the prefect as an affiliate of the “Jacobino-liberal party” who, under the innocuous cover of hygiene, had been teaching elite youth the “absurd and pernicious doctrines of materialism”—especially the “system of Gall,” according to which “all vices and crimes [are] excused, even justified, as the inevitable effects of individual physical organization.” When other citizens, including the mayor, joined in the denunciation, the state authorities closed the course. But in December 1833, an unbowed Dr. Patin again requested and received authorization for this same pedagogical endeavor. From the perspective of the July Monarchy, a supporter could now characterize the earlier incident as pure and simple “harassment” carried out by those “enemies of all social improvement who, unhappily, had too much credibility under the Restoration.”[^43]

That the founding of the July Monarchy had given the green light to phrenology was also seen in the conduct of Gall’s young widow. Though her husband had left her nearly destitute when he died in April 1828, she waited a full three years, until May 1831, to request a pension from the French state in return for her single valuable property: the large collection of skulls (600 items, 50% human, 25% mammalian, and 25% avian) that Gall had amassed over some three decades. The government referred the matter to the Muséum d’histoire naturelle, which in turn appointed a commission composed of three prestigious zoologists and comparative anatomists—Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, Blainville, and Cuvier—to study Madame Gall’s offering and assess its worth. Although agnostic on the subject of the ultimate validity of Gall’s controversial theory, the three unanimously favored acceptance of the gift, describing it as an abundance of carefully chosen material evidence supporting phrenological claims and, as such, worthy of being “deposited intact in a public institution”; the pension requested by the widow Gall was, moreover, a fair price for it.[^44] At the beginning of the July Monarchy, then, phrenology was taken seriously both by the government and by the most eminent naturalists in France.

However, even when its fortunes were in the ascendant, phrenology was dogged by its propensity to pass rapidly and uncontrollably into popular culture. Properly managed, such popularization could be useful, or at least benign. By 1837, when Gall’s collection was already on display at the Museum, a pocket guide for visitors to the Jardin des Plantes (the location of the Museum) included a long section describing the skulls in detail, thus recognizing their iconic status for a curious public.[^45] But popularization could also have a distortive and damaging effect. Writing in the Society’s journal in 1837, Charles Place decried the “Phrenological and Physiognomical Consultation” that had just sprung up on the well-trafficked Boulevard Saint-Martin. Situated behind a drop cloth featuring a “large and inane countenance drawn according to the phrenological topography of I don’t know who,” it bore the authentic phrenological slogan, “The external man is the projection of the internal man.” All manner of charlatans had previously occupied the very same location, exhibiting such wonders as the “Skeleton Man” and the “Mechanical Man.” Thus, in Place’s view, did the unwitting enemies of phrenology “pollute public opinion” by informing the “credulous” popular classes that “this science, which is truly a science” was instead a “mumbo jumbo.” They did a disservice both to phrenology and to the people, pandering to the latter’s “faculty of marvelousness” (one of the phrenological brain organs) instead of instructing them to “moderate [their marvelousness] with the most severe rationality.”[^46]

That even the educated classes had a highly ambiguous conception of phrenology during the first decade of the July Monarchy can be seen in a curious case heard by a Paris criminal court in November 1836: a defamation suit brought by the heirs of a deceased woman against two physicians for the phrenological opinions they had announced after an autopsy of her brain. The use of phrenological experts in Paris police matters was not unusual at this date. Dumoutier, for example, was summoned to neighborhood police headquarters in 1833 to examine the skull of a woman believed to have committed suicide and to give his opinion about her propensity for such a drastic act. He found, among other anatomical features illuminating her character, a weakly developed organ of biophilie—a sure mark of a vulnerability to taking one’s own life in times of stress.[^47] But the respect for the scientific status of phrenology that the Paris police evinced in this instance was hardly universal.

In the 1836 case, the widow Chéron, a well-to-do rentière, had been murdered at her home near Versailles two years before, at which time the judiciary had ordered a routine autopsy of her body. One of the physicians engaged for this purpose decided to seize the opportunity to “submit the head [of the deceased] to the examination of a phrenologist” and thereby to “confirm the value that phrenological science could have for forensic medicine.” He chose a certain Dr. Leroi of Versailles and, to authenticate the experiment, even arranged to have it witnessed by two other physicians and by some medical students serving as interns in the local hospital.[^48] Dr. Leroi’s findings were hardly flattering to the widow Chéron. Presented only with the head of a woman, and denied all information about her, he identified her dominant traits as ruse and love of money. Happily for the phrenological enterprise, if unhappily for the widow and her descendants, these derogatory pronouncements were then amply confirmed by acquaintances of Madame Chéron.[^49] Pleased with his own performance, Dr. Leroi hastened to report it to the Paris Phrenological Society, of which he was a member. The secretary of the Society then communicated the news in the report of the year’s activities that he presented at the annual meeting, in the presence (according to one source) of five or six hundred people.[^50] From there it was picked up by the newspaper Le Messager des Chambres, which, for purposes of its feuilleton, seems to have embroidered the story by depicting the widow Chéron as a notorious moneylender and miser.[^51] The newspaper thereby earned itself inclusion in the defamation suit.[^52]

Our appreciation of the significance of this “bizarre”[^53] case is unfortunately hindered by the paucity of documentation. Not only, as is standard for Paris trials of this era, did the judicial dossier perish in 1871 in the fires of the Paris Commune, but the harsh press law of 1835—a mark of the regime’s retreat, in the face of left-wing opposition, from its initially liberal commitments—even prevented newspapers from offering full coverage of the judicial proceedings. Thus, we will never know what the lawyers and judges had to say about the complex “questions of morality, jurisprudence, and science” with which the suit confronted them.[^54] However, we can infer from the wording of the accusation, and even more emphatically from the fact that the Paris judiciary agreed to hear the case, that it was perfectly acceptable in educated circles at this date to assume that phrenology lacked scientific content. Note that while the heirs were objecting to the publicity given the phrenological reading, they were not citing a failure to keep the “medical secret”—a failure actionable under Article 378 of the Napoleonic penal code. A suit under Article 378 would have been based on a presumption of the real expertise of the physicians who had characterized the widow Chéron’s condition and hence of the veracity of their comments; its point would have been to preserve the right of an individual or family to keep knowledge about a medical condition scrupulously private.[^55] The heirs’ charge of defamation instead suggested the probable falsity of the phrenological opinion, and hence its “insulting” nature and capacity to “undermine the honor and esteem that rightly belong to the family.”[^56]

The case thus effectively put phrenology itself on trial and, more generally, seemed to engage the judiciary in the dubious business of distinguishing legitimate scientific hypotheses and conclusions from malevolent slander. As such, it became a cause célèbre, drawing crowds of lawyers, law students, scholars, and ordinary Parisians to the courtroom. Not surprisingly, organized phrenology was also well represented among the spectators at the trial. A request by the Paris Phrenological Society for a large number of tickets had gone unanswered, but the followers of Gall and Spurzheim made a point of arriving early enough to claim unreserved seats.[^57] One commentator alleged that enthusiasts of the “phrenological cause” had so thoroughly packed the chamber that they had to be forcibly restrained.[^58] That the Chéron case also had a civil libertarian and hence, under the July Monarchy, a political dimension was seen in the fact that the two physicians had chosen as one of their lawyers Alexandre-Auguste Ledru-Rollin, the future Minister of the Interior of the Second Republic whose republican sentiments had already been made known when in 1834 he criticized the Guizot government for carrying out the massacre on the Rue Transnonain.[^59] Nor was the trial without comedy: the speech of the lawyer for the Messager (of which no record has survived) was said to have “provoked in the audience a hilarity that all the gravity of the judges was not always able to forbid.”[^60]

In the end, the judge handed down a compromise verdict that avoided the larger, jurisprudential issues of the case and focused on technicalities. The memory of the dead ought to be respected, he said, and hence the heirs had justly protested the “flagrant insults” directed against the deceased. On the other hand, the physicians had evinced no malicious intent—they had been motivated instead by what the judge called an “indiscreet zeal for the scientific system they profess”—and hence the charge of defamation was inapplicable to the facts. The judge cautiously neglected to commit himself one way or another on the issue of whether that “system” was genuinely “scientific” or, if it was, whether it warranted special, free speech protection. He did, however, cite in favor of the plaintiffs that the phrenological reading of Madame Chéron’s character had been “contradicted in an authentic manner” during the course of the trial by the attestations of the authorities of the commune in which she had lived. The judge declared himself incompetent to decide whether the phrenologists therefore owed the heirs monetary damages and, in Solomonic fashion, he divided the cost of the judicial proceedings between the parties.[^61] It was, in short, neither a victory nor a defeat for phrenology, but rather a marker of its liminal status even in the best of times.

Also in 1836, the institutionalization of phrenology in France reached its zenith. The venerable if controversial Dr. F.-J.-V. Broussais, who had “converted” to phrenology shortly after 1828,[^62] was allowed to give a public course on that subject at the Faculty of Medicine of Paris, where he had held a chair in general pathology since the 1830 Revolution. The course, it must be stressed, was not integrated into the regular medical school curriculum but was classified as a form of supplementary, elective instruction for which the Faculty had made available one of its amphitheaters. Nonetheless, the mere fact that phrenology had (literally) gotten its foot in the door—that, again, it had achieved liminal status—was a momentous occasion at the time.

Contemporary accounts of Broussais’ lectures invariably stress the excitement of the large crowd in attendance, estimated as 3,000 strong by one horrified Cousinian.[^63] A police report described the “noisy” audience as composed not merely of medical students but of students of all sorts who came to hear Broussais “combine political teachings with the principles of the purest materialism”; it went on to note that the professor’s interactive style—he invited questions during his presentation—gave rise to nonstop interruptions and other such disorders.[^64] The audience proved to be too excited for its own good, for its uncontrollably effervescent behavior resulted in the closing of the course after only three sessions, all of them held in the space of a single week. As Broussais memorably described the debacle in a personal letter, the students had, by the second session, taken to “invading” the preceding class in order to be assured a seat at the phrenology lecture; they made such a racket while waiting that they prevented the professor from giving his lesson. By the third session, the administration had, not inappropriately, locked the doors of the preceding class and posted guards both outside and inside. But, not to be deterred, the aficionados of phrenology carried off the guards and battered down the door. Broussais then conferred with the dean of the medical faculty and, in light of “these encroachments on the premises and this violence,” temporarily suspended the course with the assurance that another, off-campus site would be found for it. However, when approached by the dean, the professors of the Jardin des Plantes refused to lend their facilities to Broussais. The medical students then raised a subscription to rent a private hall. But now the Paris Prefect of Police intervened, refusing to give Broussais the necessary authorization to teach a public course. He explained his position by characterizing Broussais’ phrenological doctrines as “incendiary” and (here Broussais is probably embellishing the actual statement) “dangerous for a group of young people who are ardent, materialist, atheist, Anabaptist, anarchist, in a word, bad.” At the very moment that phrenology was acquiring a significant token of official acceptance, its perceived political and religious radicalism once again consigned it to exclusion.[^65]

In fact, phrenology was not necessarily out of tune with the socioeconomic biases of the July Monarchy. Just as it was construed in the opening years of the regime as fostering bourgeois political economy by pointing the way to a more efficient division of labor, one that scientifically matched workers’ native talents to their jobs, so too the semiotic abilities it imparted were seen as aiding the bourgeoisie (and others) in navigating the increasingly anonymous environment of the nineteenth-century metropolis. In the full printed version of his abortive phrenology course, Broussais observed that the “art of dissimulating has been carried so far in our present state of civilization” that the experience through which we gradually learn the true character of another person almost always comes too late. Phrenology could, however, substitute for hard-earned experience, alerting us to and deciphering the “external, positive signs” of our fellows’ mental makeup before we entered into friendships or business contracts.[^66] Thus a standard application of Gall’s science in this period was the hiring of domestic servants. A popular phrenology manual written and illustrated by Spurzheim’s son-in-law offered a visual image of the kind of woman who should not be employed as a nanny: one whose cranial conformation (large and nearly round) announced, even beneath her coiffure, “secretiveness” and “acquisitiveness” as well as a marked insufficiency of the requisite protuberances for “kindness” and “love of children” (philogeniture).[^67] Reflecting the situation of the bourgeoisie after the abolition of the corporations, the same manual mentioned the workshop manager (chef d’atelier) as someone who could make good use of phrenology because his occupation required him to choose his employees from among strangers.[^68] Insofar as phrenology offered a guide to those areas of nineteenth-century activity once safely regulated by corporate and community ties but now left to the forces of the market, it could readily serve practical, everyday bourgeois needs.

[To view this image, refer to the print version of this title.]

Figure 6: Phrenological Self-Exploration through Palpation. Daumier’s cartoon, which appeared in Le Charivari in March 1836 and was (untranslatably) entitled “Le Cranioscope-Phrénologistocope,” captures the bewilderment of the French layman confronted with the new social expectation that he achieve scientific self-understanding. This bourgeois, wearing the black frock coat that was the sign of his class, seems to have purchased study aids: a treatise of phrenology as well as two porcelain models of the cranium indicating the position of the brain organs. The year 1836 marked the high point of phrenology’s respectability in the eyes of the French scientific establishment; hence, Daumier’s choice of a bourgeois rather than a working-class devotee is especially appropriate. Daumier’s antic caption reads: “Yes, that’s it. I have the bump of ideality, of causality, of locativity. It’s a prodigiosity.” (Benjamin A. and Julia M. Trustman Collection, Brandeis University Libraries)

Yet the embourgeoisement of phrenology, which took place in early nineteenth-century Britain (where it then ushered in a strong, second-phase phrenological movement among the working classes),[^69] never occurred in France. The letters of French phrenologists to George Combe, the Edinburgh lawyer turned leader of British phrenology, are peppered with laments about the comparative status of phrenology in the two countries. “Now I do not know that [any] French man has paid particular attention to Phrenology in order to establish this science. It is the greatest effort in them to allow its existence and importance. Be certain, you and your countrymen will be the best defenders and members of phrenology.” Or, of a text by Combe just translated into French by Giovanni Fossati, an Italian-born phrenologist living in Paris: “It is a very strange thing that an elementary work on phrenology is, in France, the work of a Scot and an Italian, in France, I say, where Gall and Spurzheim, Germans, published their first and most important works. But in this country our science still encounters a mass of powerful adversaries. . . .”[^70] One major factor that seems to have obstructed the implantation of phrenology among the French bourgeoisie was the quasi-hegemonic power to define the bourgeois psyche that Cousinianism acquired after 1832 by means of France’s centralized system of secondary education, which had no analogue in Britain. Certainly, the increasing conservatism that characterized the July Monarchy after the working-class uprisings of the early 1830s played a role in placing phrenology out of bounds. In addition, the gravitas and high-flown dignity of the Cousinian moi must have made the comic aspects of popular phrenology all the more dissonant for potential consumers of Gall’s science among the French middle classes.

### The Imperative of Popularization

The double accusation “materialist and fatalist” routinely leveled against phrenology by its detractors was only half justified. While the first part of the accusation had a certain plausibility and could be honestly debated, no careful reader of Gall and Spurzheim could have seriously categorized their doctrine as fatalist. Early nineteenth-century phrenology never recommended passivity in the face of information about one’s cerebral constitution. Rather, it taught that brain organs, though innate, were malleable to a limited but nonetheless meaningful degree. If people were born with certain talents and propensities, and if these could be revealed through scientific investigation, then the responsibility fell to those people, or to their parents, or, perhaps, to society as a whole to tailor a suitable education for them: one that encouraged the growth and expression of the brain organs controlling positive, socially useful traits and inhibited the growth and expression of those controlling negative, socially harmful ones. Phrenology was, in other words, a passionate summons to educational activism. Gall even identified it as such in the opening lines of the inaugural lecture he gave in Paris in 1808, shortly after his arrival in the French capital. The whole purpose of advancing scientific knowledge of the human race was, he said, “to give a clear direction to education” and “an appropriate impulsion to the different passions in order to make them the instruments of the particular happiness of the individual and of the general good of society.”[^71]

Hence, the idea that phrenology needed to be both popularized and applied to concrete, ameliorative projects was integral to the theory. Béraud expressed that ethos succinctly in 1848. “Phrenology,” he said, “consists wholly in its practical application.”[^72] Decades earlier, Spurzheim’s letters to his British counterpart George Combe revealed an almost obsessive concern with propagation. “I am very much obliged to you for the kindness of letting me know the various circumstances which may have some influence on the propagation of the doctrine,” he writes on one occasion.[^73] On another, “I am actually [Spurzheim’s Franglais for ‘currently’] delivering a course of lectures, and I am much pleased with my auditors. They are gentlemen from all countries, and I am certain they will become disciples who will feel inclined to propagate phrenology.”[^74] Spurzheim championed the writing of phrenological case histories less from scientific considerations than from tactical ones connected to the central task of propagation:

> The knowledge of Phrenology, if true, must increase; it is, however, important to awake constantly the public attention. It is not necessary to write long articles. I wish the friends might begin to describe cases, just as is done with other branches of knowledge, medicine for instance, or surgery. The common reader wishes to be amused with anecdotes. Each fact is more convincing than all details of principles in my book.[^75]

After the death of his wife, he rededicated himself to the phrenological cause: “Having lost her with whom alone and for whom alone I could have lived, I shall employ my whole mind to the propagation of phrenology.”[^76] The same ethos was expressed by a fictional phrenologist in a boulevard melodrama of 1834 coauthored by Auguste Luchet. Chided by friends for “killing himself” with long hours of public and private teaching, he rejoins, “Everyone on earth has his mission . . . Mine is to continue the work of my illustrious master, Gall; mine is to popularize with all my strength the admirable science that makes the good and bad penchants of a man legible on his head.” What fuels his zeal is his belief that phrenological knowledge can reclaim society’s outcasts. “Education must take hold of the dangerous child, combat his baneful penchants and neutralize their power by developing opposing penchants.”[^77]

To the meliorist commitment that formed an internal, logical reason for the phrenologists’ support of the popularization of their science was joined an equally powerful sociological reason: if they were excluded from official science and from the state educational establishment, they would have to look downward in the social scale and find their allies among the people.

In opting for such a strategy, the phrenologists had before them the example of a fellow traveler, Auguste Comte. A staunch supporter of phrenology by the early 1820s and a founding member of the Paris Phrenological Society in 1831, Comte even adopted phrenological language in calling the type of government he envisioned the “organ” of the common good.[^78] After attempting unsuccessfully to persuade the establishment of the truth of his positive philosophy, he decided that the political transformation he envisioned—that is, the transfer of the functions of government to a scientifically informed body that would expertly manage affairs for the good of society as a whole—instead required an appeal to the working classes. The workers had, after all, escaped the intellectual deformation effected in the privileged and powerful classes by the vicious educational regimen of the day, one that not only emphasized metaphysical philosophy and imaginative literature but also encouraged a narrow specialization that prevented an apprehension of the interconnectedness of all knowledge. The workers qualified, in other words, as the collective tabula rasa on which the positive philosophy could be readily imprinted.[^79] Hence, beginning in 1830 and throughout the years of the July Monarchy, Comte gave a Sunday morning course in “popular astronomy” free of charge to the working classes of the third arrondissement of Paris; comprised of some two dozen weekly sessions, it was serious fare for such an audience as well as substituting for the Catholic Mass as a Sunday morning activity.[^80] Whether deliberately or not, phrenologists gradually adopted a roughly Comtean model of propagation.

### The Laudable Superficiality of Phrenology

Guizot’s 1826 article “Abrégé” (see Chapter 5) had explicitly placed psychology in the category of sciences unsuited for popularization. Psychology of the introspective variety—the only variety Guizot recognized—could not, he argued, be adequately represented or communicated by a succinct account of its conclusions. It instead required the student to rediscover those conclusions personally through his own essays in interior observation, through a sounding of the depths of consciousness that could occur only at the end of a long period of formal schooling. Phrenologists, however, tended to make the opposite claim for their psychological science. Its insights, they said, were readily available to every comer. Easy-to-use visual abrégés of the doctrine—in the form of diagrams of the brain or plaster casts of the skull indicating the location of the different cerebral organs—were its stock in trade. Phrenology excelled in the production of “immutable mobiles,” those enduring yet portable inscriptions that, according to Bruno Latour, both readily convey knowledge and persuade audiences of its scientific worth.[^81] If the Cousinians emphasized mysterious depth (though never depth that precluded consciousness) as the salient characteristic of their psychology, the phrenologists almost boasted of superficiality: the surface of things, highlighted in the procedure of cranial palpation, announced the most valuable knowledge.

Claims about the ease of acquiring phrenological competence abound in the writings of advocates of phrenology. Years before Gall arrived in Paris, Charles Villers, who had translated Kant into French and was committed to informing the French about advances in knowledge on the other side of the Rhine, published a sympathetic account of phrenology in the form of an open letter to Georges Cuvier. It was not, he said, that Gall’s research was the most significant of recent German scientific endeavors. He had singled it out, rather, because of its extraordinary potential for popularization. “The new theory is easily understandable, even among the least educated of people.”[^82] In the early 1820s, Ange Guépin described Gall’s “system” to a boyhood friend as “entirely new yet very simple.”[^83] Calling on artists in 1829 to apply craniology to drawing and painting, Dr. Fleury Imbert, a Lyonnais phrenologist who had married Gall’s young widow, anticipated the objections of his audience: “How to acquire all the details [of this science] if one hasn’t studied it with undivided attention? . . . Aren’t brain organs as numerous as shades of color? How to distinguish among them? How to become familiar with them? It’s a Chinese alphabet.” But he then went on to dismiss such worries out of hand. “It’s only a question of some general data furnished by observation, only facts that everyone can, without study, verify everyday.”[^84] Most phrenologists were not as cavalier as Imbert, but they still believed that their science could be very readily absorbed and that simple pedagogical techniques would speed up the process.

Thus Spurzheim was pleased to report to Combe in 1831 that he had supervised the development of a phrenological study aid: a set of sixty plaster phrenological “specimens” that its manufacturer sold for two guineas. Spurzheim envisioned that it would find a market among those “auditors [of courses in phrenology] who complain that they have no opportunity of exercising their phrenological skill.” Such a person might “study at home and exercise his eyes in seeing differences of size and form.” The kit would also be useful in giving “private instruction in phrenology to children in families, as it is done with geography. . . .”[^85] Similarly, acknowledging his nomination for honorary membership in the fledgling Paris Phrenological Society in September 1831, Combe had words of advice for its secretary, Casimir Broussais. The “first care” of the Society should be “to accomplish the instruction of their members in the organology of the science.” He spoke from personal experience, he assured Broussais fils. He had in Edinburgh “put skulls in the hands of the members and engaged them in writing down the development” (a term of art for the relative size of each brain organ). “They were astonished at first at the extent of their ignorance but after some weeks of practice were delighted in the progress they made in acquiring positive ideas.”[^86]

In sum, unlike Cousinian psychologists, phrenologists were committed to demystifying their special knowledge. They boiled it down for ease of transmission and emphasized its broad accessibility.

### Channels of Popularization: Cours libres and Almanachs populaires

How could the advocates of phrenology bring their science to the people? Even after 1830, the French government posed obstacles to the dissemination of what one bureaucrat nervously described as a science “that so closely touches the principles on which society rests.”[^87] Keeping phrenology out of the official curricula of state-run institutions was only the government’s first line of defense. A Napoleonic decree of 17 March 1808, still in force throughout the whole period of the monarchie censitaire, required authorization from the Ministry of Public Education for any so-called cours libre—that is, any lecture series taught in a public venue outside the state educational system. This requirement was, as the opening paragraph of this chapter has shown, the snare that kept Béraud off the podium. The Ministry’s archives concerning early nineteenth-century petitions for cours libres are spotty; some phrenology courses that I have seen mentioned in printed sources have left no archival trace. Hence these archives cannot be trusted to tell us much about the absolute magnitude of phrenology instruction. But they do indicate the possibilities for government meddling: bureaucrats reviewed course petitions with considerable care and, in the end, had an arbitrary power of refusal. I will limit myself to just a few examples of petitions, both granted and rejected, from this period.

Two requests by physicians to teach phrenology courses free of charge in Lyon in 1844 were granted swiftly and straightforwardly. Both petitioners were well known to the local authorities; one practiced medicine on the outskirts of the city, the other was Fleury Imbert, a major figure in the French phrenological movement who, at the time of his petition, held a professorship at the city’s Ecole de médecine. Back in 1829, Imbert had even won a concours for the position of chief surgeon at the Lyon hospital despite accusations that his well-known advocacy of phrenology necessarily identified him as an atheist.[^88] What expedited decision-making on the 1844 petitions was the existence of criteria established by the medical school. It had explicitly adopted the liberal principle that instruction in all the branches of medicine ought to be made available to its students as long as unofficial courses were neither taught on its premises nor at hours that conflicted with the official curriculum.[^89] But elsewhere clear guidelines of this sort seemed to be lacking.

In 1846, for example, a certain Dr. Funel petitioned the minister for permission to open a free public course in phrenology in Rouen. His request had already been favorably received by the mayor of the city, who had, in turn, referred him to the higher reaches of the bureaucracy for definitive approval. The minister requested a background check on Funel from the rector of the educational administrative district of Rouen, who discovered that the young doctor had only recently settled there and was “known by no one.” The rector thus summoned Funel before him to gather the relevant information face to face; he learned that Funel had studied law before deciding to obtain a degree in medicine, that while attempting to set up a medical practice in Marseille he had taught phrenology for three years at the municipal school there, that he had relocated to Rouen to take up a post as physician to the English workers building the railroad between that city and Le Havre, and that he now wished to gain a local reputation by means of a course that would “pique the curiosity of the public.” Grilled by the rector on how he intended to present “so delicate” a subject matter as phrenology, Funel was extremely forthcoming. He volunteered that the “reserve” he had shown in drawing out the implications of phrenological theory when teaching in Marseille had brought him “much praise from religious persons.” That he hastened to name names, without knowing what kinds of connections the rector might have among the Marseille “notabilities,” convinced the rector of his candor. He concluded that Funel should be allowed to teach phrenology in Rouen because he would do so with due respect for “elevated questions of civic and religious morality.” After all this labor on the part of his subordinate, the minister nonetheless decided not to grant the authorization, and he conveyed that information without any explanation whatsoever.[^90] We can only assume that he was less sanguine than the rector about the lack of moral danger entailed in Funel’s teaching.

Advocates of phrenology who were denied authorization to teach cours libres still had recourse to itinerant demonstrations of their craniological skills. They could also reach a popular audience by means of articles inserted in almanacs. “A thorough history of almanacs since the discovery of printing could be an excellent introduction to the use of books for the instruction of the most numerous classes.” So began the entry on almanacs in a left-leaning encyclopedia published during the July Monarchy. The entry went on to say that this genre, originally the work of astrologers offering meteorological predictions and physicians peddling hygienic advice, had assumed a decidedly partisan cast and a new role in early nineteenth-century France. “Today it can be said that almost every almanac circulated among the poor is under the influence of a religious, philosophical, or political opinion.” As such, almanacs had become the auxiliaries of newspapers; they were “arms of propaganda that each system, each party, annually sends out across France, beyond the habitual circle of traffic in books.”[^91]

The Almanach populaire de la France, where (as mentioned in the opening section) Auguste Luchet’s attention-getting article on phrenology appeared in 1837, was one of the most notorious instances of the genre. Its editor, the ex-Carbonaro Frédéric Degeorge, was a provincial journalist, vigorous defender of the freedom of the press, and republican activist with a network of contacts in Paris. He introduced the Almanach populaire in 1836 as a national and far more politically outspoken version of his earlier, local creation, the Almanach populaire du Pas-de-Calais. For the first four years of its existence, the Almanach populaire was unceasingly pursued by the government for its seditious content: the seizure of all extant copies and the indictment of editor, printer, and contributing authors on press violations became something of an annual ritual.[^92] Bureaucratic memoranda concerning the 1837 edition convey the alarm that this little publication inspired in the authorities. A letter of the Paris Prefect of Police to the Minister of Justice described “several articles that engender in the minds of readers sentiments hostile to the government and that excite in the lowest classes of society animosity against the classes that are above them by dint of function or fortune.” The Almanach populaire was a “scurrilous lampoon” (libelle), a “dangerous work poisoning the capital.” Its large print run and modest cost per copy (50 centimes) enhanced the threat it posed.[^93] In Lyon, recently the scene of the silkworkers’ uprising, the attorney general used lurid language to announce the confiscation of a shipment of the Almanach populaire at a local bookstore “to which it had been sent to infest our working class.”[^94] In the fall of 1837, a police chief in the Ministry of the Interior anxiously reported an article in the Bon Sens, a newspaper edited by Luchet. It had announced provocatively that, far from being deterred by government harassment, Degeorge had already sent the next year’s edition of the Almanach populaire to press.[^95]

Anxiety emanated from other sectors of French society as well. Reviewing the latest edition of the Almanach populaire, a newspaper with religious sympathies sternly specified the features that made that publication unsuitable for its working-class readers: the utter absence from its pages of references to the Christian faith or to such moral virtues as temperance, thrift, patience, and resignation. While writing for le peuple was, said the reviewer, a “sacred calling” in principle, the Almanach populaire failed the avid mass audience that had bought 50,000 copies in 1838 and double that number in 1839. “It reminds the people of their rights but not of their duties.” Happily, continued the journalist, a new instance of the genre, the thoroughly Christian Almanach des Bons-Conseils, would soon challenge its dominance.[^96]

The government carried out its seizure and destruction of the 1837 edition of the Almanach populaire so effectively that my search of Paris libraries and archives failed to turn up a single copy of it. But Degeorge reprinted Luchet’s phrenology article in the 1838 edition, which was apparently less thoroughly extirpated by the police and which additionally contained the text of Luchet’s (successful) self-defense before his accusers at the criminal court of the Pas-de-Calais. So celebrated had the whole affair become that an advertisement for the 1838 edition announced Luchet’s speech in bold type and endorsed his original, inflammatory article.[^97]

Entitled “A Word on the Direction to Give to the Teaching of Phrenology,” Luchet’s article called for the shift in the audience of phrenology that would soon occur in fact. It argued that phrenology was by its nature an “entirely democratic science” whose “future [and] triumph” lay in its implantation among the people. “To wish to limit phrenology, as has been done until now, to the supposed instruction of rich and well-bred people . . . is to throw before swine the pearls of the legacy of Gall.” The rich, presently cosseted by society, had no incentive to appreciate Gall’s message about the essential cerebral equality of mankind:

> You will never persuade a juré censitaire [a man whose high tax payment qualified him for service as a juror under the July Monarchy], living in perpetual terror of the possible unleashing of base passions, that he, a notable, a member of the electorate, who has never lacked bread, would have been able to become a criminal—just like the accused man he is about to condemn—if one day poverty shook up certain of his cerebral forces. . . . How would you ever get into the head of a cabinet minister or a king the smallest grain of sympathy for phrenology, for a science that recognizes no privilege of heredity or caste, that banishes crowned foolishness from the throne and replaces it with the intelligence of commoners?

In Luchet’s implicit scenario, then, phrenology might teach a rich man willing to listen that he possessed a large bump of theft and that the only reason that he was more law-abiding than his poor counterpart was not because of his intrinsic moral superiority but simply because his cerebral constitution had never been tested by hunger. It might teach a king or cabinet minister willing to listen that his intellectual faculties were inadequate for his position and that he ought to step down in favor of a humble but intellectually gifted man. But what rich man or king or cabinet minister would be willing to listen?

Hence Luchet concluded, “The time has come for phrenology to construe its mission in a completely different way,” to seek an audience among workers rather than elites. The poorest classes had “a sole and precious capital” of which they could not be despoiled: intelligence. Phrenology would teach them to “make use of [this] power which, appropriately exercised, can replace and surpass all other powers.” Once “applied to the instruction, to the consolation of the people”—consolation because it would show them that they were not, as they thought, devoid of resources—phrenology would have “prodigious results”: “What colossal reform, what immense transformation! Nothing, it seems to me, can give an adequate idea of the energetic, invincible development of this innumerable mass of intelligences and wills magically awakened from their mortal torpor.”[^98] The rendition of phrenology Luchet presented here thus largely ignored Gall and Spurzheim’s precise physiological and craniological teachings. It stressed politically charged themes: the malleability of our cerebral endowment by means of education; the democratic distribution of both positive and negative traits throughout all classes of society, so that no class could claim intrinsic moral or intellectual superiority.

Other popular almanacs also disseminated information about phrenology. The Almanach prophétique, a creation of the 1840s, told readers about Dumoutier’s phrenological museum in Paris, describing it reverently as a place of “calm and silence, [where] everything invites contemplation and meditation.” In the course of reviewing the plaster casts of famous heads displayed there, it articulated the educational credo of phrenology, regretfully exclaiming about one notorious criminal of the day, “Lacenaire, whom society repelled from its bosom when it could have made a useful man of him.”[^99] But as befit its name, it more typically (if completely improperly) conflated phrenology with the occult arts of prediction that were the traditional stuff of almanacs.[^100]

Far more explicitly political and far more thorough in its account of phrenology was the Almanach de la communauté of 1843, condemned by the government and then reincarnated in 1844 as the otherwise identical Almanach de l’organisation sociale. Its title page bore the inscription “by various communist writers,” and the principal force behind it was Théodore Dézamy, a self-proclaimed communist who had earlier served as secretary to the theorist of utopian communism, Etienne Cabet. Dézamy was frankly materialist. When the 1844 Almanach was successfully prosecuted for press violations, among the offensive passages cited was: “We are not among those who hope for happiness beyond the grave. Happiness is on earth. . . .”[^101] The Almanach de la communauté contained a long article, “Phrenology: A Chapter on the Physics of the Human Mind,” by the Belgian phrenologist Napoléon Barthel, a corresponding member of the Paris Phrenological Society.[^102] The article was intended as an abrégé, a succinct introduction to Gall’s science, emphasizing its development after Gall and describing the purview of each of the brain organs.[^103] Since Dézamy and his fellow editors announced the “vulgarization of social science” as the primary goal of the Almanach, it is clear that phrenology was their preferred scientific account of the domain of human mental life and the one they regarded as suitable for life in a communist society.

### The Company It Kept

Nothing better shows the left-wing political identity of phrenology under the July Monarchy than the company it kept—that is, the cluster of radical pedagogical schemes that tended to gravitate toward it or to which it extended its hand in fellowship. Although these schemes and phrenology sometimes conflicted in their details, they all belonged to a common universe of discourse that featured some combination of physiology, political opposition, and pedagogical reform for the betterment of the working classes. All participated in a veritable ferment of utopianism that marked the French public sphere in the decades leading up to the 1848 Revolution, when highly inventive blueprints for nonviolent social change, usually claiming scientific status, vied for the attention of likely constituencies and potential benefactors. The Saint-Simonians wished to abolish inheritance, place productive forces in the hands of those best qualified to exploit them maximally, and in addition “emancipate the flesh”; the followers of Cabet wished to establish a perfectly egalitarian community of a million inhabitants called Icaria, where property and dwelling places would be collective, industry planned, and money banished; the Fourierists wished to make all aspects of life, especially work, sensually pleasurable and to reorganize society and economy into small, autonomous communities called phalansteries. Though phrenology contained no explicit social doctrine, contemporaries were inclined to perceive and cultivate its affinities with pre-Marxian socialism.

Since Fourierism derived from a theory of “passional attraction” conceived on the Newtonian model, Fourier’s disciples seemed automatically to assume that phrenology disclosed the specific brain physiology undergirding the founder’s social ideas. “The points of agreement are numerous,” wrote Charles Pellarin in a detailed, two-part article in 1833. “What is initially striking about Gall’s enumeration of the faculties is that the first three, whose location is the best documented, are also those that Monsieur Fourier has so well defined and even hierarchized among themselves: love, familial feeling, friendship.”[^104] Fourier, in turn, wrote a long, testy response to Pellarin, “protest[ing] against any agreement” between his incontestable and lasting discoveries and “these [other] doctrines temporarily in vogue.” For one thing, phrenology situated all the passions in the brain, thus “dethroning” what Fourier regarded as their true seat, the heart. For another, phrenologists failed to recognize that the evaluation of any individual pas-sional constitution was primarily a function of the prevailing social order: whether it was the repressive “civilization” of Fourier’s own era or the “harmony” that would be inaugurated in the phalanstery, an institution devoted to permitting the full expression of its members’ natural passions while providing a scientifically engineered social context in which those passions would necessarily be harnessed for useful ends. Once human social life had been relocated to the phalanstery, observed Fourier, there would be “no disadvantage in discovering that a child possesses instincts that would lead, in civilization, to theft or murder,” for those same instincts would be safely rechanneled in a socially beneficial direction. Fourier assumed that “in civilization”—which was, after all, the social milieu of phrenology—a comparable discovery would have punitive or exclusionary consequences: he envisioned the preemptive hanging of an honest man displaying the cranial protuberance for murder, or the cancellation of the wedding when the fiancée was found to possess an outsized bump of coquetry.[^105]

Thus, like many of his contemporaries, Fourier ignored the profoundly meliorist orientation of phrenology, mistaking it for a fatalistic doctrine. But when we add this meliorism to the equation, we cannot help but be struck, pace Fourier, by the important similarities between Fourierism and phrenology. Both sought to know people’s innate passional givens and to use them as raw material susceptible of deliberate transformation. Not surprisingly, then, adepts moved back and forth over the boundary between the two doctrines, as through a porous membrane. In Lyon, for example, the supporters of phrenology, including their leader, Fleury Imbert, were largely “physicians who had grown up in Saint-Simonian or Fourierist milieux.”[^106] In 1836 Imbert even published an open letter to Victor Considérant, Fourier’s chief disciple, urging that phrenology and Fourierism join forces; it ended with the rousing prediction, “You will be a phrenologist.”[^107] The republican socialist Ange Guépin, introduced to phrenology (as we have seen) while still a medical student in Paris, went on to embrace Fourierism in the early years of the July Monarchy.[^108] He would later scold Fourier for failing to use extant science in his laudable project of creating a social science, a failure exemplified by his “substitution of a new psychology for that physiology known today as phrenology.”[^109] Charles Pellarin himself was, in 1833, simultaneously writing for a Fourierist journal and, as a naval doctor, attending Broussais’ clinical visits at Val-de-Grâce and accompanying the celebrated physician to the dissection theater where, “infatuat[ed] . . . with phrenology,” he measured and weighed brains.[^110] Prosper Dumont, the French translator of Combe, told the Scotsman that Fourier’s ideas so thrilled him when he first encountered them in 1832 that he immediately began to “verify [them] by phrenology.”[^111]

Two visionary pedagogical schemes of the day were also linked to phrenology. One was the “positive education” of the man known simply as Colonel Raucourt. A graduate of the Ecole polytechnique and a state engineer of bridges and roads, Raucourt had the classic background of a Saint-Simonian, but instead of joining that movement, he struck out on his own. Social change, he decided, could be achieved only by exerting transformative pressure on the individual worker, to whom it was “indispensable to teach the art of knowing and commanding oneself.” Like Comte, Raucourt installed himself in the mairie of the third arrondissement—a neighborhood apparently favored by utopian pedagogues—where he offered the working class a “free course in positive education”; having been approached by a benevolent manufacturer, he also taught workers privately in a Paris atelier.[^112]

Phrenology soon reached out to positive education. Luchet began his article on phrenology in the 1837 edition of the Almanach populaire with a long quote from Raucourt, treating him as if he were a phrenologist and concurring that the use of a scientific form of pedagogy to educate the people was the key to all desirable social and political change.[^113] Also in 1837, Broussais presented a long report on Raucourt’s project to the Paris Phrenological Society, emphasizing its many parallels with Gall’s science. Raucourt’s pedagogy was based, he told his audience, on a rudimentary physiological conception of the five senses and a sixth, called entente. This additional sense was basically equivalent to the faculty of comparing and judging “to which we assign a particular organ in the brain.” The colonel inculcated a modality of savoir-choisir in his pupils which, Broussais noted, affirming a stereotype of the working class, was directly opposed to their natural psychological habits:

> Savoir-choisir consists in. . . . disentangling the consequences, either for the external world or for themselves, of all the impulses that move them to act. Far from seeking to dissimulate, or to keep awareness of these impulses from themselves, as is customary among the people, Monsieur Raucourt trains his pupils to uncover them. The consequences are each day more strongly felt, and the motivation to repel certain suggestions [of the impulses] and to listen to others continually acquires additional weight.

Raucourt thus engaged his pupils in a “constant struggle of intelligence against instincts,” a struggle familiar to applied phrenology as well. Nor was this struggle coded in religious terms; its goal was “neither to please the divinity nor to make oneself worthy of the blessings of a future life.” Hence the adjective “positive” that Raucourt aptly gave to his pedagogy, which was truly founded “not on fictions but on facts that are within the reach of the senses.” The pedagogy’s secular orientation accorded fully with that of phrenology.

Broussais also noted divergences. Raucourt lumped all the impulses together under the name “animality,” which he situated not in the brain but “in the manner of Cabanis . . . in the heart, stomach, and sexual organs”; his physiological theory thus lacked the analytic precision afforded phrenology by its large repertory of specific brain organs. Furthermore, Raucourt had devised a “philanthropic” pedagogy useful to the working classes but not to the higher classes of society. Its goal was to silence the visceral, pleasure-seeking impulses in those whose material circumstances could not, realistically, satisfy them. It failed to recognize the just claims of “our physical organization” and offered no useful guidance to those in a position to follow the biddings of the impulses and to seize wealth, honors, and power. Phrenology was, by contrast, a psychology suited for all classes of society.[^114]

Responding to Broussais in print, Raucourt politely demurred from some of the physician’s conclusions, especially those concerning the antireligious bent of positive education. But like Broussais, he wanted to minimize the quarrel and emphasize the strong family affinity between their two doctrines. The Paris Phrenological Society, he said warmly, followed the “scientific method that is ours”—that is, “simple observation of the phenomena of nature.” Their differences in “viewpoint and language” paled before their common commitment to fact and to the “social sciences.”[^115]

Another, more radically egalitarian pedagogical movement of the 1830s was Joseph Jacotot’s “intellectual emancipation,” which held that master and pupil were equally ignorant but could nonetheless engage in fruitful mutual instruction.[^116] Jacotot gave the name “degradation” (abrutissement) to the belief in one’s own intellectual superiority, which he defined as regarding oneself able to judge other people while refusing to submit to their judgment. The remedy for abrutissement was the procedure followed in his educational institutions, where the would-be judge received the following admonition: “Sir . . . sing your little song; the child will sing his, and you will judge one another.”[^117] Jacotot intended his pedagogy as an antidote to the loathsome intellectual hierarchy that reigned in the state educational system. In his antic, somewhat opaque prose style, he made that point by mentioning both Victor Cousin and the teaching of philosophy in the lycée:

> At first I sensed that a father, however ignorant he was himself, could educate his son. I imagined how much furor that revelation would have to arouse in all the employees of the Université, from the professor of the sixth [i.e., the lycée philosophy class] to the Grand Master. Picture Cousin, the chief boiler-maker (père chaudronnier), meeting by chance Monsieur Villemain and wanting to persuade the director of public instruction that each of them could teach music to their children even though the director was as ignorant of music as the boiler-maker. . . .[^118]

Given the shared oppositional credentials of phrenology and intellectual emancipation, it is not surprising to learn that Jacotot received a visit from Broussais,[^119] who subsequently urged the founder’s physician son to attend the meetings of the Paris Phrenological Society. Dr. H.-V. Jacotot instead read the Society’s journal and was dismayed by the phrenologists’ axiomatic acceptance of intellectual inequality, the diametric opposite of the Jacotists’ own belief in what they called homophrénie.[^120] But that the two doctrines agreed in spirit and could be combined in practice is seen in the case of Ange Guépin. The socialist politician from Nantes who permanently embraced phrenology lent his enthusiastic support to Jacotot’s intellectual emancipation, or the “new method,” as he called it. He went so far as to liken the “old method” to the use of swaddling clothes for infants. “In the time of our fathers, swaddling clothes produced the most baneful results. They killed the weakest and crippled many; only the hardiest escaped.”[^121]

### Women as Consumers of Phrenology

The physiological basis of phrenology offered potential resources for a conception of women that accentuated their difference from men and could therefore argue easily for their inferior abilities. But, as the story of Cousinianism has abundantly shown, the internal logic of a psychological theory does not necessarily predict the uses to which that theory will actually be put in a specific historical context. Just as a theoretically gender-neutral Cousinianism excluded women from possession of a moi, so a phrenology seemingly prone to invidious gender distinctions tended, at least in the context of early nineteenth-century France, to be welcoming to women. This attitude was primarily a function of phrenology’s Enlightenment belief in improvement through education, which led its supporters to envision a progressive integration of women into the public sphere. It was additionally a consequence of phrenologists’ genuine open-mindedness and empiricist curiosity, their sense that their infant science as yet knew little about the relative mental strengths and weaknesses of the two sexes. For example, musing on the faculty of “concentratedness,” which manifested itself in “stick[ing] to an object,” Spurzheim asked Combe, “Do you think that the female sexe (sic) has this power stronger?” He himself thought so “as to their feelings” but doubted that “it is also the case as to their intellectual faculties.” Despite the stereotypical nature of his hunches, he ultimately suspended judgment until more data could be collected, admonishing his colleague, “[L]et us listen to observation.”[^122]

Phrenology’s welcoming attitude toward women resulted, finally, from its failure to win official acceptance: its own outsider status induced it to throw in its lot with that of society’s marginal groups.

Thus, while Caroline Angebert doubted that she would be admitted, even as a one-time auditor, to a Sorbonne lecture by Cousin, phrenologists typically went out of their way to make their public courses accessible to women. At the Athénée de Paris, where Gall and then his disciple Fossati taught phrenology, women’s attendance was encouraged by reduced subscription fees.[^123] When in 1808 Gall, still smarting from the accusations of corrupt morals he had received in Vienna, asked his female auditors to absent themselves from those of his lectures treating the phrenology of sex, a woman protested the exclusion in the pages of the Journal des dames et des modes.[^124] From phrenology’s first introduction in France, then, women seemed to regard instruction in it as their due. In Metz, where in 1834 Dr. Scoutetten gave a course on phrenology to an overflowing crowd in the largest meeting room in the city hall, women showed up in significant numbers. He noted with pleasure: “Once again the phrenology course has been the scene of a new phenomenon in the provinces, one that holds the greatest interest for the civilization of the future: the appearance of ladies. At several lectures more than a hundred of them were counted.”[^125] When Dumoutier opened a phrenological museum in 1836 as the arm of the Paris Phrenological Society devoted to propagating Gall’s science among the laity (it permanently displayed a collection of two hundred skulls and was the locus of free courses on phrenology throughout the school year), the invitation to his inaugural lecture explicitly noted, “Seats will be reserved for ladies.”[^126]

The media of the period depicted women as eager consumers of phrenology. In Luchet’s boulevard melodrama, Le brigand et le philosophe, two guests at a party argue about the validity of phrenology. Among those in attendance, it is a flock of women who follow the debate most closely. “Ask Magnus [the philosopher-phrenologist of title],” the hostess urges them, and then, turning to Magnus, she adds, “These ladies absolutely want to know.” He then explicates Gall’s science “to the ladies who surround him.”[^127] During its inaugural year of 1832, the Journal des femmes, written by and for women and dedicated to female emancipation through education, included a long quasi-fictional article called “The Phrenology Lesson.” It opens with one bourgeois lady bursting into the bedroom of a friend. From beneath the cashmere shawl that envelops her, she removes “a plaster head covered with numbers and criss-crossed with lines.” The friend responds with a fit of giggles. Far from being perplexed by the strange object, she picks up a copy of the “Manual of Phrenology of Dr. Spurzheim, which was on her dressing table,” and hands it to her visitor. She then goes over to her glass-enclosed armoire and takes out a similar plaster head. Each woman has been pursuing, on her own, the study of phrenology.[^128]

### Can Phrenology Ground a Self?

Like sensationalism, phrenology posited a material substratum of mind that was not only logically divisible by dint of its sheer materiality but also explicitly plural in fact. The bevy of discrete, atomistic sensations that came together to constitute mind in Condillac’s theory had their counterpart in the multiplicity of brain organs in Gall’s. Neither theory possessed an obvious means to overcome the plurality it posited nor to convert that plurality into the unified entity commonly referred to as the self. But the phrenologists went further along this continuum than did their sensationalist predecessors. While Locke and Condillac insisted, with varying degrees of zeal, on the capacity of their psychological theory to ground a unitary self, French phrenologists tended to doubt that such a self was either necessary or useful. That shockingly heterodox position—and one senses a certain delight that accompanied their articulation of it—marked yet another area in which they differed from the Cousinians, the masters of self-talk.

Among the supporters of phrenology, Auguste Comte presented the phrenological doctrine of the self in its bluntest and broadest form. In Lesson 45 of his Cours de philosophie positive, written at the end of 1837, he railed against “psychology,” his name for the would-be science that he conspicuously omitted from the complete catalog of positive sciences presented in the Cours. Psychology, as Comte understood the term, attempted to investigate mind by using the method of introspection. But that method was inherently defective and self-contradictory. As Comte had argued in the opening lesson of the Cours, any essay in interior observation bogged down in the merging of subject and object; the moi could not simultaneously act and see itself acting, suffer and contemplate its own suffering. As soon as observation began, the fleeting phenomenon it sought to pin down disappeared, replaced by the very act of reflection. Only the observer remained; there was nothing left to observe.[^129] An inevitably futile psychology had, in Comte’s view, been recently supplanted by phrenology, which exteriorized mind in brain, thus rendering it genuinely observable and the proper object of a positive science. Moreover, within Comte’s three-stage theory of conjoint epistemological and social progress, psychology was mired in the second, metaphysical stage, which had simply substituted abstractions for the divinities of the theological stage while persisting in the childish habit of explaining the world by reference to unknowable ultimate causes. Phrenology renounced such childishness and maturely contented itself with the kind of limited explanation offered by the discovery of lawful regularities among phenomena.

Within this schema, Comte regarded the self (moi) as a creature of psychology and of the discredited metaphysical stage. It was little more than a variant on the theological “soul,” duplicating the latter’s mysterious immateriality and perfect unity. But positive scientists were, he noted, under no obligation to carry around the old theologico-metaphysical baggage. Able “to see, unhindered, the true state of things and to reproduce it in their theories with scrupulous exactitude,” they recognized that, “far from being single, human nature is in reality eminently multiple.” By “multiple” Comte meant (as he put it in one of his typically tortured and ungainly phrases) “almost always solicited in different directions by several very distinct and fully independent powers among which equilibrium is very painfully established since in most cases none of them is pronounced enough to acquire spontaneously a high degree of preponderance over all the others.” Given the multiply importuned brain-and-nervous-system that he equated with the human mind, Comte concluded that the “famous theory of the moi” represented a “purely fictive condition.”[^130]

But where did the pervasive fiction of the self come from? Comte believed that it originated in the experience, subsequently abstracted and reified by the metaphysicians, of periods of harmony among the competing forces in a healthy organism. Thus modestly and realistically defined as a transient period of organismic accord, the self belonged to lower animals as much as to human beings—despite the claims of its metaphysical proponents that it was the infallible mark of human personhood. A cat, observed Comte gravely, very likely possessed such a self: “without knowing how to say ‘I,’ [it] does not habitually mistake itself for another”! The same was true of a host of other vertebrates of a lesser complexity than man. (When one descended far enough down the zoological scale, however, animals lacked the nervous capabilities to produce and experience the sentiment composé associated with the self.) In fact, certain higher animals might well have an even stronger “feeling of personhood” than humans do “because of their more isolated mode of life.” Rather than being a badge of superiority, in other words, a self simply translated the lack of an organized social life—the social life that would, in Comte’s theory, characterize humanity once the positive stage of history had been ushered in and sociology had for the first time been constituted as a science.[^131]

Thus phrenology perfectly suited the future social state that Comte heralded. The brain organs and their correlative mental traits concretized the so-called multiplicity of human nature. They enabled the individual to operate not as the enclosed subject of rights featured in liberal political thought (which, after all, only epitomized the fallacies of the metaphysical stage of history) but instead as a loose and versatile assemblage capable of dispersion through a network of duties to and functions in society. Finding only merit in the fragmentation of the entity commonly known as the self, phrenology used the discrete pieces to construct a truly social human being.

Comte took up this theme again in the opening lecture of his Traité philosophique d’astronomie populaire, the published version of his course for workers in the third arrondissement of Paris. Here he argued that the “positive spirit” was “alone susceptible of directly developing the social sentiment.” Those who remained trapped in the metaphysical worldview might bemoan the egoism of the age, but they could only reinforce it, given the “necessarily personal nature of such a philosophy.” The chief categories by which these metaphysicians organized the world were the moi and the non-moi. (Without explicitly identifying them, Comte thus pointed to the Cousinians as a chief instance of the guilty party.) The non-moi was the negative name “confusedly” given to the “vague ensemble” of everything other than one’s own self, even other humans. In such an impoverished conceptual universe, “the notion of the ‘we’ (nous) can find no place.” What the positive philosophy sought, said Comte, purposely playing on the Cousinian term for individual consciousness, was to familiarize people with the “sentiment intime of social solidarity.”[^132] Positivists and phrenologists, who did not regard saying “I” as an especially worthy goal, apparently knew how to say “we.”

Other proponents of phrenology expressed a view of the moi similar to Comte’s but lacking his strong social accent. Writing the article “Phrenology” for a household encyclopedia in the 1830s, Dr. Fossati immediately noted his disinclination to personify the mind. He preferred to consider esprit as a “collective noun, the conventional term for expressing the ensemble of brain functions or, if you will, the unknown cause that makes the brain . . . capable of manifesting this or that quality.” But, he warned, if we “personify this word or this unknown cause” and assign to it attributes other than simple organic functions, we enter on the false path followed by “our predecessors in philosophy, who got lost in abstract reasoning instead of setting their course by observation and induction.” Among the benighted personifiers of the mind, it turns out, are those contemporaries of Fossati’s who take the moi as a central category and treat it as a “real being.” Such a moi, he noted in an arresting metaphor, “has the effect on us of a marionette in a comedy for overgrown children.”[^133] Only children, or adults who clung to outmoded childish beliefs, could take a puppet—or the patently fictive concept of the moi, its strings pulled by such invented metaphysical abstractions as Liberty and Free Will—for a real being.

François Broussais also considered the moi from a phrenological perspective in a long paper delivered before the Academy of Moral and Political Sciences in 1838. Given the formal setting, it is not surprising that the paper lacks the polemical bite of Comte’s comparable statements. But, apart from the missing social dimension—more a function of Broussais’ way of thinking than of the circumstances of presentation—the content of the paper is as consistent with Comte’s views as the style is different.

Like Comte, Broussais wants to grant something like a self to all vertebrates, not just to human beings. “[F]earing to profane [the] word [person] by applying it to animals,” however, he ascribes to lesser vertebrates not the feeling of personhood of Cousinian fame but a more morally neutral “feeling of individuality.” He cites in favor of this view his own observations of cats and dogs in front of a mirror: at first they take their reflections for another animal of the same species and attempt to engage it in play, but after meeting with repeated failure, they lose interest in the reflection, “which seems to indicate that they have recognized themselves in it.” Dubious logic, perhaps, but it does show that Broussais shares Comte’s inter-species democratizing impulse with respect to the self and agrees that one cat is unlikely to mistake itself for another.[^134]

Decorously reserving the terms moi and sentiment personnel for humans, Broussais marks his distance from the Cousinians in every other way. He denies that the moi is innate, citing empirical evidence to argue that it is instead a child’s gradual acquisition. (A child “designates himself by the name that others give him. He will not say, ‘I want bread’ but rather ‘Paul, Charles, [or] Ernest wants bread.’”) He denies that the moi exists a priori, asserting that it develops in dialectic interaction with the outside world: people with impaired sensory organs have less experience of the external world and hence a weaker sense of self. He warns against personifying it as an independent agent. He chides those who “dematerialize” it. He refuses to adopt toward it the reverential attitude of the introspective psychologists. Classifying it as merely one faculty among many, he reserves his reverence for the organized matter that makes up our bodies:

> Let us cease being astonished at the wonders of the moi. The other faculties are no less wondrous. Do we think that one of our faculties is any more explicable than another? That would be a grave error. For us, incomprehensibility resides in nervous tissue. . . . It is there that all miracles happen, starting with that of sensibility, which has no need of the moi, nor of the feeling of personhood, nor even of the feeling of individuality, to manifest itself to us plainly.

And if the moi is only one faculty among many, it is neither a hierarchically superior one nor a directing force. “It is not then possible to establish a central moi within the group of our faculties,” Broussais asserted. The mind contained no central deliberating agency that took in data from the external world, combined them with mental contents, and then issued “orders for execution.” Broussais repeated the dictum: “[There is] no unique central point, but an ensemble . . .”[^135]

The phrenologists thus demoted the self, according it none of the grandeur that it had within the Cousinian system. To be sure, both Cousinians and phrenologists treated the mind as a microcosm of the larger world, but they understood the analogy in different ways. The Cousinians projected the three elements of consciousness upward and outward onto a metaphysical canvas where sensibility corresponded to nature, will to mankind, and reason to God. Mankind, or human society, was composed of active and willful selves, each complete within itself. The phrenologists, and most explicitly the Comteans among them, omitted the metaphysical dimension altogether and conceived of the mind as directly analogous to society, and in particular to a society formed by the division of labor. This functional connection of the two divisions of labor—the mental and the social one—was evident in phrenological discourse, which routinely mentioned the scientific determination of job aptitude as one of the major social applications of phrenology. Thus Thoré: “By indicating the capacities of each person, phrenology will enable society to direct all its members toward their specialties.” No longer will paternal fiat or the privileges of birth serve as an “obstacle to this normal and salutary [occupational] classification” according to aptitude.[^136] Or Béraud: “How many young men are thrown into a career where their faculties, which would elsewhere make them superior, leave them mediocre and incapable!. . . . It is particularly in education, then, in choosing a career for children and even remaking adults, that phrenology is truly humanitarian.”[^137] When mapped onto the larger society, the multiplicity of brain organs and their tasks illustrated the mechanism of social solidarity through specialization of function as well as the fitness of unselved human beings for the social state.

### Phrenological Subjectivity

As in the case of sensationalism, paucity of self-talk did not prevent phrenology from furnishing the conceptual basis and the language for a distinctive experience of interiority. That it did so was somewhat ironic for, while sensationalists frankly availed themselves of interior observation to obtain psychological knowledge, phrenology was supposed to operate only by observing objects (cranial protuberances and dissected brains), never by inhabiting the position of subject.

Nevertheless, phrenology could not entirely dispense with introspection. One of the more thoughtful critiques of Gall’s science offered by a Cousinian made that point persuasively. In a book of 1839, Adolphe Garnier argued that a major difficulty in carrying out the phrenological project—a difficulty that typically fomented conflict among practitioners—was the identification of the brain organs: how many there were, what the scope of each consisted in. Garnier noted that the challenges inherent in this task concerned more than objective questions of cerebral localization. “Before assigning the seat of a faculty, one must . . . confirm the existence of the faculty by purely mental observation—that is to say, one must have a psychology.” Even though phrenologists professed disdain for introspection, the founding fathers, Gall and Spurzheim, had surely been “endowed with a very high degree of psychological acuity.”[^138]

Spurzheim’s long correspondence with George Combe offers rich evidence both of the problems entailed in identifying brain organs and of Spurzheim’s own psychological flair. It also reveals the kind of fragmented or punctuated subjectivity-without-selfhood that adherence to phrenological principles encouraged.

In a letter of 1819, Spurzheim ruminated on the changes in the system of brain organs that he had introduced after his break with Gall some eight years earlier. Those changes were partly quantitative: where Gall had named twenty-seven organs, Spurzheim’s list contained thirty-five. But writing in his somewhat awkward English, Spurzheim, who had grouped the organs into the affective and the intellectual, noted that principles of classification were also at issue:

> I am sorry to say that Dr Gall will not admit the ideas I have conceived since I left him. He continues to prefer a nomenclature according to the actions, to reject the difference between feelings and intellectual faculties, to attribute inquiry and judgment to the feelings; in short to speak of the doctrine as he did 10 years ago. . . . He admits still negative faculties, fear, for instance, as absence of courage. He attributes justice to benevolence. . . .[^139]

A not insignificant portion of the Spurzheim-Combe correspondence consisted of give-and-take between the two men about how to define a brain organ. Combe had lighted upon an especially valuable specimen, the shoemaker Spence, much touted at the time for inventing a putative perpetual motion machine. A phrenological reading of his skull revealed a prominent organ of constructiveness. Spurzheim was at pains to specify the abilities that this organ controlled and those that it did not. He made the discrimination by means of the affect-intellect dichotomy that governed his scheme for classifying the organs. “Constructiveness does nothing but construct, and it can build what the other powers suggest, the model of a shoe, a loom, a wheel, &c . . . [It] may execute a model but it will not invent it. The purpose of its activity indicates the other powers which employ it. . . .”[^140] He returned to this theme several months later. “You think that constructiveness implies a power of forming ideas of the thing to be constructed. I do not think so, the idea of the thing to be constructed is the result of intellectual faculties which desire also but whose characteristics are to know.” Constructiveness was an impulse without a specific object, he insisted, just as amativity “excites to love” without “determin[ing] us to prefer a fine figure to an ugly one.”[^141]

When Spurzheim turned to describing his own actions or states of mind, or (more often) those of others, he did so by pinpointing the particular brain organs that, according to his version of phrenological theory, had contributed to the outcome in question. He typically referred to these organs by number, thus highlighting the fragmented approach to mental life to which phrenology conduced. On one occasion he tried, citing “8” (acquisitiveness) and “10” (self-esteem), to help Combe decipher the motivations behind a slight he had received from Gall. The resulting analysis sounds odd and comic to the uninitiated:

> I do not think that Dr. Gall has not answered your invitation from the motive you have mentioned. I think it is mere idleness assisted by 10. Should his 8 have gained by it, then he would have taken the trouble of answering. For in the combat of 10 & 8 this commonly gains the victory. If 10 be alone, he forgets to answer the letters he receives.

Spurzheim’s hostility toward his former mentor comes through in this letter even before he adds, slightly ungrammatically, “We both are no longer on friendly terms. . . .”[^142] On another occasion, he complained about the behavioral norms of the French scientific community. Its members typically criticized phrenology in public while simultaneously pilfering phrenologists’ ideas, using them without proper attribution. He ascribed this situation to the French national character, which he depicted numerically as insufficient in “14” (veneration, respect): “I make no appeal to 14 in this country,” he concluded with disgust. “Here one is polite, social, agreeable, but we must not expect 14.”[^143]

Sometimes, in such analyses, the brain organs were named rather than numbered. “My little marvellousness was quite astonished to see Deville’s collection,” Spurzheim exclaimed, referring to the brain organ that occupied the eighteenth position on his list. “No other indeed can be compared to it.”[^144] Whatever his cerebral givens, viewing collections of skulls and plasters seems to have frequently brought Spurzheim’s emotions to a high pitch of intensity. In 1822 he viewed the collection of a Monsieur Royer in Paris and confessed to Combe, “I must plead guilty for having taken from him several heads, particularly of monkies (sic), he had destined for your Society. I thought them necessary to me, and I could not help saying: charity begins at home.” Now, by way of explaining his conduct, he invoked his wife’s phrenological interpretation. She had zeroed in on the eighth organ. “Mrs. Sp. was with me to pick them out. She accused me that she had never seen my covetousness or bitter acquisitiveness so active as at that moment.”[^145]

A similar if more amateur use of phrenology can be seen in the copious personal jottings of the early nineteenth-century sculptor Pierre-Jean David, called David d’Angers. A specialist in busts of living celebrities, and an ardent republican in politics, he turned to phrenology (Gall’s version of it) to aid his eye in seizing on the cranial characteristics that expressed personality traits.[^146] For example, meeting the novelist Eugène Sue in the early 1830s, he noticed an absence of the “bumps” for music, construction, and poetry, only mediocre development of the bump of comparative discernment (sagacité comparative), and very prominent bumps for distinction and physical love. Sue’s bump of “ideality” (Gall’s term for the synthesizing power of imagination) combined its force with those for ruse, perseverance, and cruelty. David summed up these visual findings in a highly derogatory vignette: “This man is cruel, inflexible; he obviously relishes depicting human suffering, he eats human flesh, so to speak . . .”[^147]

David turned the same phrenological eye on himself. A railway trip in 1840—surely a quintessential early nineteenth-century experience—caused him to ruminate on the brain organ of sagacité comparative and to locate in it an essential rational capacity of human beings:

> When one travels by railroad, the horses on the plain seem not to be moving even though they are. When one is in a stagecoach the horses regain—or at least seem to regain—their real movement. It is by comparison that we perceive life. The bump of sagacité comparative is the one that completes man. Without it, he is deficient. He is almost always prey to all sorts of aberrations. He is the slave of his senses, the plaything of all his illusions. He can have wit but never genius.[^148]

Sometimes this kind of self-reflection emphasized even more the fragmentation of subjectivity attendant on a phrenological perspective. In a passage written in 1832, David attributed to the discernibly corporeal exertions of a single brain organ what another person might well describe and analyze as a complex experience of intellectual inspiration. “When an idea comes to me and moves me strongly by the enthusiasm that it procures for me, I feel very factually (positivement) an itch, a fire, in the spot of the bump of exaltation.”[^149]

Turns of phrase of this sort could sometimes have a tautological quality, even as they indicated a propensity to understand one’s states of feeling in phrenological terms. Thus, describing his life as an impoverished journalist to his mother in 1835, Thoré substituted for the fact of his hearty appetite the brain organ presumably controlling it. “It is necessary to eat, and I have the misfortune of possessing a very developed organ of alimentivity.”[^150] The bachelor Prosper Dumont, Combe’s French translator, demonstrated a more complex and artful manipulation of phrenological language in a letter to Combe’s unmarried niece. Remembering the pleasant hours he had spent with her in Edinburgh, he said that he often vowed to visit her again. “You know that I love voyages,” he continued, “and that my organization should lead me back frequently to that idea. For more than a year I have never desired any other voyage but that to Edinburgh.”[^151] Dumont achieved a fine compromise. It was in his organization—that is, his cerebral constitution, his complement of brain organs—to crave travel. But if that craving was a given for him, its object was not. In the elective sentimental preference for Miss Cox that gave form to Dumont’s diffuse, constitutionally determined impulse to travel lay a touch of phrenological romance.

As these examples suggest, phrenology readily lent its initiates a mode of constructing their subjectivity. Like phrenological doctrine itself, the subjectivity produced was pointillist or punctuate. It focused on the discrete contributions of separate cerebral organs and, for better or worse, omitted any image of the whole.

### Banishing Self-Talk

The trajectory of phrenology in France shows once again—this time in reverse—the strongly bourgeois affiliation of the unitary moi. Gall’s disciples attempted to turn phrenology into a mainstream French doctrine, one that would minister to the needs of the country’s elite, serve the growing industrial economy, and win institutionalization in the state educational system. That attempt failed and, by default, phrenology found a niche as an oppositional doctrine promoting the improvement of the condition of the working class. It advanced the argument that the lot of the individual worker would improve once he submitted to a cranial reading in order to learn, first, his mental aptitudes and hence his optimal location in the division of labor and, second, his dangerous tendencies, which could then be neutralized by a special educational program drawn up for him by the phrenological experts. Self-knowledge was thus the key to improvement. Encouraging self-scrutiny through a simple, graphic technology, phrenology clearly offered the worker a particular version of subjectivity. It offered him a self in the sense of that term I have used in this book: the individuated mental stuff and the individual’s own representation of it.

But while valorizing the psychological dimension and providing a language for speaking about it, phrenology shunned self-talk per se. It distanced itself from the moi of the Cousinians and everything that the moi stood for: the sacralized quality of an immaterial self, the obscurity of the procedures for accessing the portion of consciousness that qualified as the self, the rigid principles of social hierarchy associated with selfhood. The Cousinians, of course, had thoroughly affirmed the moi. For them, it was a source of human efficacy and moral responsibility in the world and a point of connection between the human and the divine. The phrenologists saw it in wholly negative terms. One republican socialist close to phrenological circles put it memorably. Of the unhappy bourgeois whose meager aptitudes matched neither his elite education (“he studied in a collège royal [the name given to the lycée during the period of the constitutional monarchy] and emerged stuffed with scraps of Greek and Latin”) nor his high place in the social division of labor, he said, “This man oozes the moi and the greed for gain from every pore.”[^152]

### NOTES

For the source of the epigraph, see note 143.

[^1]: 1. Gazette des tribunaux, 29 November, 4 December, 5 December 1839.

[^2]: 2. AN: F17 6649, Dossier: Allier, Director of General Police to Minister of the Interior, 27 April 1843; University of France to Minister of the Interior, May 1843; Minister of Public Instruction to Rector of the Academy of Clermont, 8 May 1843. The two most important secondary works on phrenology in France are Georges Lantéri-Laura, Histoire de la phrénologie (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1970, 2d ed., 1993), which focuses on the brain anatomy and physiology underlying the theory, and Marc Renneville, Le langage des crânes: Une histoire de la phrénologie (Paris: Institut d’édition Sanofi-Santhélabo, 2000), which focuses on the milieux in which phrenology was propagated. Virtually all of my research for this chapter was done well before the appearance of Renneville’s book.

[^3]: 3. See the excerpts from a variety of provincial newspaper accounts of these demonstrations, reprinted by Béraud in his book, De la phrénologie humaine appliquée à la philosophie, aux moeurs et au socialisme (Paris: Durand, 1848), pp. 367–80. See also the copy of his printed handbill, “Prospectus: Phrénologie expérimentative et démonstrations particulières” (Grenoble: Prudhomme, Impr., n.d.), in AN: F17 6649, Dossier: Allier, esp. pp. 3–4. Béraud charged a fee for each cranial inspection, but the amount, left blank on the handbill, was presumably written in by hand and subject to change.

[^4]: 4. Béraud, De la phrénologie humaine. (See note 3, earlier.)

[^5]: 5. For his father’s occupation, see his birth certificate, dated 18 September 1818, Etat Civil, Mairie de Lyon. Béraud’s passport deceptively gave Paris as his birthplace; see Archives de la Loire, 10M25, sub-prefect to prefect, 25 February 1843.

[^6]: 6. See Félix Herbet, “Auguste Luchet (1805–1872): etude bio-bibliographique,” Abeille de Fontainebleau, supplement of 3 January 1913, n.p.

[^7]: 7. “Procès de l’Almanach populaire de la France,” La Phrénologie, 20 December 1837, p. 1.

[^8]: 8. On Dumoutier’s early enrollment at the Paris Faculty of Medicine, see AN: AJ16 6425, AJ16 6426. His later records are located at the Paris Medical Faculty itself because the Archives Nationales took over from the Faculty only the files of those students who actually completed the medical degree.

[^9]: 9. On the choice of Dumoutier for this post, see Renneville, Langage des crânes, pp. 206–8. A fellow phrenological adept criticized Dumoutier for political timidity; see Théophile Thoré, Dictionnaire de phrénologie et de physiognomie, à l’usage des artistes, des gens du monde, des instituteurs, des pères de famille, des jurés, etc. (Paris: Librairie usuelle, 1836), “Dumoutier,” p. 135.

[^10]: 10. See Bibliothèque du Musée de l’Homme, Paris, MSS 72 and 227. Renneville, who consulted the Dumoutier papers held by the phrenologist’s family, specifies that in the late 1830s Dumoutier was almost 10,000 francs in arrears in his rent payments; see Langage des crânes, p. 206.

[^11]: 11. On Guépin’s first exposure to Gall, see his undated letter to Emile Souvestre, Archives de la Loire-Atlantique, 19 J 12. My thanks to the chief archivist, X. du Boisrouvray, for sending me a photocopy. For a recent treatment of Guépin’s political career, see Pamela Pilbeam, “A Forgotten Socialist and Feminist: Ange Guépin,” in Problems in French History, ed. Martyn Comick and Ceri Crossley (Hampshire, UK: Palgrave, 2000), pp. 64–80.

[^12]: 12. A. Guépin, Lettre à Ribes, de Montpellier, sur divers sujets de chirurgie, de médecine et d’hygiène (Nantes: Prosper Sebire, 1835), pp. 60–62.

[^13]: 13. See, e.g., A. Guépin, “Lettres phrénologiques à Monsieur Dejort,” La morale indépendante, 17 July 1870.

[^14]: 14. This portrait derives from the letters to his mother of 20 July 1833, 31 December 1834, 4 January 1836, and 29 March 1836, in Thoré-Bürger peint par lui-même: Lettres et notes intimes, ed. Paul Cottin (Paris: Nouvelle revue rétrospective, 1900), pp. 16, 21, 25, 27–35. See also the biographical sketch in ibid.

[^15]: 15. Thoré, Dictionnaire de phrénologie, “Art,” p. 48, and “Propriété,” pp. 359–60.

[^16]: 16. Angebert to Cousin, 8 August 1829, Cousin manuscripts, Bibliothèque de la Sorbonne, (henceforth, Cousin MSS), vol. 214, #81. This letter also appears in Jules Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire, M. Victor Cousin: sa vie et sa correspondance, 3 vols. (Paris: Hachette, 1895), 3: 174–85, quotation on 182.

[^17]: 17. Adolphe Garnier, La psychologie et la phrénologie comparées (Paris: Hachette, 1839), “Avertissement,” pp. i–ii.

[^18]: 18. Amédée Jacques, Jules Simon, and Emile Saisset, Manuel de philosophie à l’usage des collèges (Paris: Joubert, 1846), p. 40.

[^19]: 19. Gall expressed annoyance at this confusion very early in his career; see “Lettre du docteur F. J. Gall en 1798 à M. Joseph Fr. de Retzer,” in G.A.L. Fossati, Questions philosophiques, sociales et politiques traités d’après les principes du physiologie du cerveau (Paris: Amyot, 1869), pp. 287–302, esp. 300.

[^20]: 20. “Note de l’éditeur allemand,” in ibid., p. 287.

[^21]: 21. Gall supplies this autobiographical anecdote in Sur les fonctions du cerveau et sur celles de chacune de ses parties, 3 vols. (Paris: J.-B. Baillière, 1825), 1: 3–4.

[^22]: 22. On Gall’s dissection method, see, e.g., J. B. Mège, Manifeste des principes de la Société phrénologique de Paris adopté dans sa séance du 9 décembre 1834 (Paris: Impr. de Pihan Delaforest, 1835), p. 12.

[^23]: 23. For this expression, see, e.g., ibid., p. 14.

[^24]: 24. M. Delabosse (pseud. for Jean-Baptiste Dubois), M. Têtu, ou la cranomanie (Paris: Barba, 1808).

[^25]: 25. For an overview of some of these parodies, see Renneville, Langage des crânes, pp. 83–86.

[^26]: 26. See MM. Tenon, Portal, Sabatier, Pinel, and Cuvier, Rapport sur un mémoire du MM. Gall et Spurzheim relatif à l’anatomie du cerveau (Paris: Baudouin, n.d.), pp. 1–3, 52; Renneville, Langage des crânes, pp. 78–83; Lantéri-Laura, Histoire de phrénologie, p. 130.

[^27]: 27. See Barbara Haines, “The Athénée de Paris and the Bourbon Restoration,” History and Technology 5 (1988): 249–71, esp. pp. 253, 267, for the adjectives quoted; and Martin Staum, “Physiognomy and Phrenology at the Paris Athénée,” Journal of the History of Ideas 56 (1995): 443–62, esp. p. 452.

[^28]: 28. Maine de Biran, Journal, ed. Henri Gouhier, 3 vols. (Neuchatel: La Baconnière, 1954–57), 2: 9. The lecturer was the physician Etienne Pariset.

[^29]: 29. Renneville, Langage des crânes, pp. 88 and, for the quotation, 91.

[^30]: 30. On Gall’s dislike of the word “phrenology,” see Fossati’s note to “Lettre à Retzer,” p. 300 n. 1. For Spurzheim’s views, see his letter to George Combe of 22 October 1819, in National Library of Scotland (henceforth NLS), Combe Manuscripts 7204, fols. 158–59. Like all the Spurzheim letters in this collection, this one is in English: “Phrenology is the true name of our inquiries, let it be explained by the doctrine of the relation between mind and brain since the root indicates both mind and brain.”

[^31]: 31. Gall, “Lettre à Retzer,” p. 300.

[^32]: 32. Spurzheim to Combe, June 1825, NLS, Combe MSS 7216, fols. 78–79.

[^33]: 33. Spurzheim to Combe, 8 June 1826, NLS, Combe MSS 7218, fols. 97–98.

[^34]: 34. AN: F17 3038, Dossier: Sociéte phrénologique, Ministry of Commerce and Public Works to Consul-general of France in London, 19 September 1832.

[^35]: 35. See, e.g., the letter of George Combe to his French translator, Prosper Dumont: “The French consul here . . . has been desired by the French consul in London to report the state of Phrenology in Edinburgh for the information of the Minister of the Home Department in Paris. I have given him every information. . . .” Combe to Dumont, 19 October 1832, Combe MSS 7385, fols. 399–400.

[^36]: 36. Spurzheim to Combe, 12 October 1830, NLS, Combe MSS 7226, fols. 108–9.

[^37]: 37. AN: F17 3038, Ministry of Commerce to Prefect of Paris, April 1831; Paris Phrenological Society to Ministry of Public Instruction, 20 February 1833; and Ministry of Public Instruction to Bouillaud, President of the Phrenological Society, 26 February 1833.

[^38]: 38. Ibid., Casimir Broussais to Minister of Public Instruction, 26 March 1834.

[^39]: 39. See Eugène Bareste, “Le Phrénologiste” in Les Français peints par eux-mêmes, 8 vols. (Paris: Curmer, 1840–42), 3: 97–104, esp. 99. For the actual regulations, see the manuscript “Règlement,” dated 14 January 1831, in AN: F17 3038, and the revised Statuts de la Société phrénologique de Paris (Paris: Impr. de E. B. Delanchy, 1843).

[^40]: 40. See the 1831 “Règlement,” Art. 1, and “Conseil d’Etat, Comité de l’Intérieur et du Commerce, Extrait du registre des délibérations du Comité,” 25 April 1834, AN: F17 3038.

[^41]: 41. The Journal de la Société phrénologique de Paris was published from 1832 to 1835.

[^42]: 42. See the postscript to David Richard’s report on a meeting of the Paris Phrenological Society, Revue encyclopédique 55 (1832): 718–27, esp. 726–27.

[^43]: 43. AN: F17 6649.

[^44]: 44. R. Verneau, “Documents inédits sur Gall et sa collection,” Anthropologie 7 (1896): 195–98.

[^45]: 45. Louis Rousseau and Céran Lemonnier, Promenades au Jardin des Plantes (Paris: J.-B. Baillière, 1837), pp. 100–136. The authors were, respectively, an assistant naturalist at the Muséum and a professor of natural history at a Paris lycée. The collection also had iconic status among phrenologists. After Gall’s death, Spurzheim commented on the succession struggle in Paris: “Fossati will wish to make a figure. If he marry Madame Gall and get the collection and Gall’s skull, he will produce some effect.” Spurzheim to Combe, 11 September 1828, NLS, Combe MSS 7222, fols. 120–21.

[^46]: 46. La Phrénologie, 30 November 1837, p. 4.

[^47]: 47. “Procès-verbal de l’examen phrénologique de la veuve Landon, suicidée,” reprinted in A. Penot, Phrénologie des gens du monde: Leçons publiques données à Mulhouse (Mulhouse: P. Baret, 1838), pp. 247–51.

[^48]: 48. See “Procès en diffamation et injures publics intenté par les héritiers de Mme veuve Chéron,” Le Droit, 9 November 1836, p. 1276.

[^49]: 49. Gazette des tribunaux, 21 October 1836.

[^50]: 50. Le Droit, 9 November 1836.

[^51]: 51. Quoted from the Le Messager des Chambres in Gazette des tribunaux, 21 October 1836.

[^52]: 52. The three persons named in the suit were the secretary of the Paris Phrenological Society, who broadcast the affair at the Society’s annual meeting; a physician who, having known the widow Chéron personally, wrote a confidential letter confirming the findings of the phrenological reading of her head; and the managing editor of Le Messager des Chambres. See Gazette des tribunaux, 9 November 1836.

[^53]: 53. The adjective is employed in the Gazette des tribunaux, 21 October 1835.

[^54]: 54. The Gazette des tribunaux of 9 November 1836, p. 29, offered that inventory of the various dimensions of the case. It was also explicit about the reason for its inadequate coverage: “Article 10 of the law of 9 September 1835, which prevents newspapers from detailing the proceedings of defamation trials, forces us to confine our report to the complaint and the verdict.”

[^55]: 55. Raymond Villey, Histoire du secret médical (Paris: Seghers, 1986), pp. 59–63.

[^56]: 56. Quotations from Gazette des tribunaux, 21 October 1836. Technically, a charge of diffamation did not at this date require that the insult be true. The law of 17 May 1819 had revised the Napoleonic penal code, omitting the misdemeanor of calumny, which was defined as a false statement, and replacing it with defamation, a slander that could be true or false. Yet early nineteenth-century defamation law in France was very undeveloped; the terms of the 1819 law had hardly been glossed. See Etienne-André-Théodore Grellet-Dumazeau, Traité de la diffamation, de l’injure et de l’outrage, 2 vols. (Riom: E. Leboyer, 1847), 1: 1, 58. Hence the accusation of the widow Chéron’s heirs easily slid into an attack on the validity of phrenology.

[^57]: 57. Gazette des tribunaux, 9 November 1836, p. 29.

[^58]: 58. [Louis Peisse], “Procès phrénologique,” Gazette médicale de Paris, 2d ser. 4 (1836), 12 November 1836, p. 721. This is one of a series of wickedly funny feuilletons on phrenology that Peisse published anonymously in the Gazette; for his revelation of his authorship, see his letters to Cousin, Cousin MSS, vol. 243, #3987, n.d., and #3988, 7 August [no year].

[^59]: 59. Gazette des tribunaux, 9 November 1836, p. 30; A.-A. Ledru-Rollin, Mémoire sur les événements de la rue Transnonain dans les journées des 13 et 14 avril 1834, 2d ed. (Paris: Guillaumin, 1834), which concludes (p. 59) with a prediction that “le peuple” will rise up to avenge the massacre.

[^60]: 60. Gazette des tribunaux, 9 November 1836, p. 30.

[^61]: 61. Ibid.

[^62]: 62. See the speech by Fossati, president of the Paris Phrenological Society, in Compte rendu de l’inauguration de la statue de F. J. V. Broussais au Val-de-Grâce à Paris le 21 aout 1841 (Paris: Impr. de Mocquet, 1841), esp. p. 78.

[^63]: 63. Garnier, “Avertissement,” Psychologie et phrénologie comparées, p. ii.

[^64]: 64. AN: F17 6686, Minister of the Interior to Minister of Public Instruction, 24 April 1836, quoting a report from the Prefect of Police.

[^65]: 65. Broussais to Montègre in Horace de Montègre, Notice historique sur la vie, les travaux, les opinions médicales et philosophiques de F. J. V. Broussais (Paris: J.-B. Baillière, 1839), pp. 65–66. See also Jean-François Braunstein, Broussais et le matérialisme: Médecine et philosophie au XIXe siècle (Paris: Klincksieck, 1986), pp. 154–55.

[^66]: 66. F. J. V. Broussais, Préface, Cours de phrénologie (Paris: Baillière, 1836).

[^67]: 67. Hippolyte Bruyères, La phrénologie: Le geste et la physionomie mis en scène (Paris: Aubert, 1846), pp. 444–45 and Plate 85.

[^68]: 68. Ibid., p. 486.

[^69]: 69. See Roger Cooter, The Cultural Meaning of Popular Science: Phrenology and the Organization of Consent in Nineteenth-Century Britain (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984).

[^70]: 70. Spurzheim to Combe, 14 April 1823, NLS, Combe MSS 7211, fols. 85–86, in English (or Franglais) in the original; Fossati to Combe, Paris, 26 January 1838, MS 7238, fol. 221.

[^71]: 71. Discours prononcé par M. le docteur Gall à la première séance de son cours public, le 15 janvier 1808. Introduction au cours du physiologie du cerveau (Paris: Didot, 1808), pp. 3–4.

[^72]: 72. Béraud, Phrénologie humaine, p. ii.

[^73]: 73. Spurzheim to Combe, Paris, 18 November 1817, NLS, Combe MSS 7202, fol. 111.

[^74]: 74. Spurzheim to Combe, Paris, 20 December 1820, NLS, Combe MSS 7205, fols. 156–57.

[^75]: 75. Spurzheim to Combe, London, 20 May 1817, NLS Combe MSS 7202, fol. 115, my italics.

[^76]: 76. Spurzheim to Combe, March 1830, NLS, Combe MSS 7226, fol. 101.

[^77]: 77. Félix Pyat and Auguste Luchet, Le brigand et le philosophe, représenté pour la première fois à Paris sur le théâtre de la Porte-St-Martin, le 22 février 1834 (Paris: Impr. de Mme Lacombe, n.d.), p. 10. See also p. 26: “Education corrects nature. The good penchants combat the bad and even reduce them to impotence.”

[^78]: 78. Mary Pickering, Auguste Comte: An Intellectual Biography, vol. 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), pp. 303–5, 349, 420, 600–604.

[^79]: 79. Bernadette Bensaude-Vincent, “Auguste Comte, la science populaire d’un philosophe,” Corpus, revue de philosophie 4 (1987): 143–67, esp. pp. 151–53.

[^80]: 80. Ibid., pp. 143–47; and Annie Petit, “La diffusion des savoirs comme devoir positiviste,” Romantisme 19 (1989): 7–25, esp. 10–11. Comte published the substance of the course in 1844 as the Traité philosophique d’astronomie populaire.

[^81]: 81. Bruno Latour, “Visualization and Cognition: Thinking with Eyes and Hands,” Knowledge and Society 6 (1986): 1–40, esp. 6–7.

[^82]: 82. Charles Villers, Lettre à Georges Cuvier . . . sur une nouvelle théorie du cerveau, par le docteur Gall (Metz: Collignon, Year X–1802), pp. 4–5.

[^83]: 83. Guépin to Souvestre, n.d., Archives de la Loire-Atlantique, 19 J 12.

[^84]: 84. F. Imbert, Avis aux artistes lyonnais (Lyon: Impr. de Brunet, 1829), p. 2, my italics.

[^85]: 85. Spurzheim to Combe, 20 May 1831, NLS, Combe MSS 7227, fols. 197–98.

[^86]: 86. Combe to C. Broussais, 26 September 1831, NLS, Combe MSS 7385, fols. 127–28, my italics. On “development,” see the checklist prepared for use at the Musée Phrénologique, where the “degrees of development” are given as “very great, great, medium, little”; AN: AJ15 562, Dumoutier papers, Dossier: Ouverture du Musée phrénologique.

[^87]: 87. AN: F17 6649, Dossier: Allier, Director of General Police to Minister of Public Instruction, 27 April 1843.

[^88]: 88. See Imbert’s reference to this incident in Avis aux artistes lyonnais, nonpaginated introductory material and its note 1.

[^89]: 89. See AN: F17 6667, Dossier: Rhône. The other petitioner was a Dr. Duchêne of Givors. Imbert’s proposed course was the “exposition of a new medical doctrine,” left unspecified, but almost certainly having phrenological content.

[^90]: 90. AN: F17 6701–2, letters of 5 December 1846, 4 January 1847, 3 February 1847.

[^91]: 91. “Almanach,” Encyclopédie nouvelle, ed. P. Leroux and J. Reynaud, 8 vols. (Paris: Gosselin, 1835–41), 1: col. 352–55.

[^92]: 92. See “Affaire de l’Almanach populaire,” Gazette des tribunaux, 25–26 March 1839, p. 527; and André Fortin, Frédéric Degeorge (Lille: Collection du Centre régional d’études historiques, 1964), esp. pp. 92–98, 118–26.

[^93]: 93. AN: BB18 1242, doss. 4359, letter of 21 January 1837.

[^94]: 94. Procureur général, Cour royale de Lyon, to Minister of Justice, 9 February 1837, AN: BB18 1366, doss. 4753.

[^95]: 95. The passage from the newspaper is quoted in a letter of 29 September 1837 from the director of general police in the Ministry of the Interior to the Minister of Justice; AN: BB18 1257, doss. 7271.

[^96]: 96. Le Semeur 8 (25 December 1839): 410–12.

[^97]: 97. The advertisement, in Degeorge’s newspaper, Le Progrès du Pas-de-Calais, 25 January 1838, also noted that the 1838 edition was already in its sixth printing of 10,000 copies. The endorsement described Luchet’s “article on the phenomena of intellectual organization” as “written with as much profundity as verve.”

[^98]: 98. “Un mot sur la direction à donner à l’enseignement de la phrénologie,” Almanach populaire de la France, 1838, pp. 43–47; author identified in table of contents (p. 141) as “A. Luchet.”

[^99]: 99. Eugène Bareste, “Curiosités: Le Musée phrenologique,” Almanach prophétique, 1842, pp. 74–80, esp. 75, 80.

[^100]: 100. See, e.g. “La prophétie de Gall,” ibid., 1841, pp. 154–56, where Gall correctly unmasks as a murderer a suave aristocrat at a party who is mocking phrenology; and “Mademoiselle Lenormand,” ibid., 1843, pp. 81–99, esp. 93, the story of a young woman possessing powers of divination, who consults Dr. Gall; he tells her she can become the greatest sorceress in Europe and takes her under his wing “to teach her phrenology and the techniques of palmistry and necromancy.”

[^101]: 101. See Joseph-Pierre Chasson, Traité des délits et contraventions de la parole et de l’écriture de la presse, 2d ed., 2 vols. (Paris: Videcoq, 1845), 1: 314.

[^102]: 102. See his membership certificate signed by, among others, Auguste Luchet, in the Dumoutier papers, AN: AJ15 562, Dossier: Phrénologie: Documents divers.

[^103]: 103. In both the Almanach de la communauté and the Almanach de l’organisation sociale, the article appears on pp. 94–130. Barthel refers to it as an abrégé on p. 110n.

[^104]: 104. C. Pellarin, “Les physiologistes et M. Fourier,” La réforme industrielle, ou le phalanstère 2 (1833): 100–104, 138–41, esp. 100–101.

[^105]: 105. Ch. Fourier, “Les alliés dangereux,” La réforme industrielle 2 (1833): 149–52, esp. 149, italics in the original.

[^106]: 106. Renneville, Langage des crânes, p. 154.

[^107]: 107. Dr. Ombros (pseud. for Fleury Imbert), A M. Victor Considérant: Lettre d’un disciple de Gall à un disciple de Fourier (Lyon, Impr. G. Rossary, 1836), esp. pp. 18–19, 23.

[^108]: 108. Guy Frambourg, Le Docteur Guépin, 1805–1873: un philanthrope et démocrate nantais (Nantes: Impr. de l’Atlantique, 1964), p. 109; and Jean Maitron, Dictionnaire biographique du mouvement ouvrier français (Paris: Editions ouvrières, 1964–), pt. 1, vol. 2, pp. 309–11. Guépin seems to have been more influenced by Saint-Simonianism than by Fourierism, turning to the latter after the demise of the former.

[^109]: 109. A. Guépin, Philosophie du socialisme, ou étude sur les transformations dans le monde et l’humanité (Paris: G. Sandré, 1850), p. 627.

[^110]: 110. Charles Pellarin, Souvenirs anecdotiques: médecine navale, saint-simonisme, chouannerie (Paris: Librairie des sciences sociales, 1868), pp. 40–41. Like his fellow physician Guépin, Pellarin had allegiances to both Fourierism and Saint-Simonianism, as well as to phrenology.

[^111]: 111. Dumont to Combe, 3 November 1832, NLS, Combe MSS 7228, fols. 86–87.

[^112]: 112. See the history given in Raucourt’s newspaper, L’Educateur: Journal de l’Institut de la morale universelle 1 (1836): 1–2. On Raucourt’s relation to Saint-Simonianism; see Broussais, Communication faite à la Société [phrénologique de Paris] dans sa seance du 25 janvier 1837 sur la méthode d’enseignement qui suit M. le colonel Raucourt (Paris: Impr. de Dezauche, n.d.), p. 4. For the 1832 petition of the manufacturer A.-J. Beauvisage for authorization to instruct his workers in Raucourt’s method with Raucourt’s assistance, see AN: F17 6685.

[^113]: 113. Luchet, “Un mot,” p. 43.

[^114]: 114. Broussais, Communication sur Raucourt, pp. 3, 5–6, 12, 14–16, my italics.

[^115]: 115. For Raucourt’s comments, see L’Educateur 1 (January–February 1836): 2; and 2 (May–June 1837): 65 and 69 n. 13.

[^116]: 116. See Jacques Rancière, Le Maître ignorant: Cinq leçons sur l’émancipation intellectuelle (Paris: Fayard, 1987); and Jean-François Garcia, Jacotot (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1997).

[^117]: 117. “Philosophie panécastique: éducation des abonnés,” Journal de l’émancipation intellectuelle 2 (1830): 441–48, esp. 448.

[^118]: 118. Ibid., p. 441. Jacotot seems not to know that Cousin, a bachelor, had raised no children.

[^119]: 119. “Variétés,” Journal de l’émancipation intellectuelle 2 (1830), p. 477.

[^120]: 120. See H. V. Jacotot, “3e lettre au dr. Broussais,” Journal de l’émancipation intellectuelle 3 (1835): 17–32, esp. 20–21, 31. The first two letters are absent from the Bibliothèque Nationale’s incomplete collection of this journal.

[^121]: 121. A. Guépin, Résumé de la méthode de Jacotot, par M. [Emile] Souvestre, 2d ed. (Nantes: Mellinet-Malassis, n.d.), p. 10.

[^122]: 122. Spurzheim to Combe, Paris, 14 April 1823, NLS, Combe MSS 7211, fols. 85–86.

[^123]: 123. See “Athénée de Paris . . . Extrait du Programme pour l’année 1823,” Revue encyclopédique 16 (1822): 420–21.

[^124]: 124. Renneville, Langage des crânes, pp. 91–92.

[^125]: 125. Scoutetten, “Avertissement,” Leçons de phrénologie (Metz: S. Lamort, 1834), n.p.

[^126]: 126. See AN: AJ15 562, Dossier: Musée phrénologique, both for the mission statement in the manuscript “Discours d’inauguration” and for the invitation.

[^127]: 127. Pyat and Luchet, Brigand et philosophe, p. 26.

[^128]: 128. Mme A. Dupin, “La Leçon de phrénologie,” Journal des femmes 1 (1832): 169–76, quotations on 169. On the aims of the journal, see “Aux abonnés,” ibid., 313–15.

[^129]: 129. For the canonical text, see Comte, Cours de philosophie positive, 2d ed., 5 vols. (Paris: Baillière, 1864), 1: 32–33. Comte articulated the argument much earlier; see Comte to Valat, 24 September 1819, in Auguste Comte, Correspondance générale et confessions, ed. P. E. de Berrêdo Carneiro and P. Arnaud, 8 vols. (Paris: Mouton, 1973–1990), 1: 58–59.

[^130]: 130. Auguste Comte, Cours de philosophie positive, Leçons 1 à 45, ed. Michel Serres, François Dagognet, and Allal Sinaceur (Paris: Hermann, 1975), Lesson 45, pp. 842–82, esp. 857. On this theme, see also Jean-François Braunstein, “Antipsychologisme et philosophie du cerveau chez Auguste Comte,” Revue internationale de philosophie 52 (1998): 7–28.

[^131]: 131. Comte, Cours de philosophie positive, ed. Michel Serres et al., Lesson 45, esp. p. 858.

[^132]: 132. Auguste Comte, “Discours préliminaire sur l’esprit positif,” Traité philosophique d’astronomie populaire (Paris: Carilian-Goeury, 1844), pp. 72–74.

[^133]: 133. Fossati, “Phrénologie,” Dictionnaire de la conversation et de la lecture, 52 vols. (Paris: Belin-Mondar, 1832–39), 43: 449–61, quotations on 450, 455.

[^134]: 134. F. J. V. Broussais, “Du sentiment d’individualité, du sentiment personnel et du moi, considerés chez l’homme et chez les animaux,” Mémoires de l’Académie des sciences morales et politiques 3 (1841): 91–146, esp. 92, 95–96.

[^135]: 135. Ibid., pp. 101, 105, 110, 135–37, 144. For commentary on this and other relevant texts by Broussais, see Braunstein, Broussais et le matérialisme, pp. 136–38.

[^136]: 136. Thoré, Dictionnaire de phrénologie, “Professions,” p. 357; see also “Spécialités,” p. 389, and “Père,” p. 330.

[^137]: 137. Béraud, “Prospectus.”

[^138]: 138. Garnier, Psychologie et phrenologie comparées, p. 16.

[^139]: 139. Spurzheim to Combe, 10 June 1819, NLS, Combe MSS 7204, fols. 106–7.

[^140]: 140. Spurzheim to Combe, August 1818, NLS, Combe MSS 7203, fols. 111–12. On the claim to fame of the individual Spurzheim identifies only as “the shoemaker Spence,” see Arthur W. J. G. Ord-Hume, Perpetual Motion: The History of an Obsession (London: Allen and Unwin, 1977), pp. 85–86; Spence’s invention was written up in the Annales de chimie in 1818.

[^141]: 141. Spurzheim to Combe, 7 November 1818, NLS, Combe MSS 7203, fols. 115–16.

[^142]: 142. Spurzheim to Combe, 12 August 1820, NLS, Combe MSS 7205, fols. 160–61.

[^143]: 143. Spurzheim to Combe, February 1824, NLS, Combe MSS 7214, fols. 50–52.

[^144]: 144. Spurzheim to Combe, London, March 1825, Combe MSS 7216, fols. 74–75.

[^145]: 145. Spurzheim to Combe, 21 August 1822, NLS, Combe MSS 7209, fols. 107–8.

[^146]: 146. David seems to have adopted a dualist version of phrenology. As he wrote in 1839 about listening to the music of Cherubini at a funeral mass and then catching sight of the heads of the singers: “One is pained to see such sublime sounds come out of such a ridiculous machine. That’s what proves that mind (âme) is independent of matter. . . .” Les Carnets de David d’Angers, 2 vols. (Paris: Plon, 1958), 2: 40.

[^147]: 147. Ibid., 1: 172.

[^148]: 148. Ibid., 2: 93.

[^149]: 149. Ibid., 1: 225.

[^150]: 150. Thoré to his mother, 27 December 1835, in Thoré-Bürger peint par lui-même, p. 25.

[^151]: 151. Dumont to Marion Cox, 23 April 1833, NLS, Combe MSS 7230.

[^152]: 152. Hippolyte Tampucci, “Remerciement aux souscripteurs aux oeuvres de Magu,” in Magu, Poésies nouvelles (Paris: Delloye, 1842), p. v. The worker-poet Magu was well-known for his connections with the Paris Phrenological Society; see, e.g., A. Carro, “Biographie littéraire de Magu,” in ibid., pp. vii–viii.
