## Epilogue

When you have just taken the bachot at the age of seventeen with the “I think, therefore I am” of Descartes as your text and you open The Psychopathology of Everyday Life and you read the famous episode of Signorelli with its substitutions, combinations and displacements, implying that Freud was simultaneously thinking of a patient who had committed suicide and of certain Turkish mores, on so on—when you read all that, your breath is simply taken away.

Jean-Paul Sartre

With the marginalization of phrenology in the late 1840s, and the strong reaffirmation of the unitary moi that it represented, we come to the end of our principal story. But to tie up some loose ends and grasp more fully the significance of Cousin’s project, we need to look ahead into the latter half of the nineteenth century. This epilogue will consider three aspects of the post-1850 history of Cousinian self-talk, all hinted at in the body of the text: the fate of the internal contradictions of Cousinian psychology with respect to its denial of selfhood to workers and to women, respectively; and the remarkable longevity of Cousinianism, or, more precisely, of certain of its signature psychological elements, in the philosophy curriculum of the lycée. Finally, turning to a theme that I have not yet touched upon, I will briefly sketch out the implications of the nineteenth-century contest of psychologies for its much more famous successor, the so-called discovery of the unconscious that took place at the fin-de-siècle.

### Vindicating the Workingman: The Affaire Jacques

As Chapter 4 has shown, nothing in the internal logic of Cousin’s psychology compelled his exclusion of certain large groups, notably workers and women, from the capacity for reflection required to disaggregate the three primordially fused elements of consciousness (sensation, reason, and will) and to appropriate the will for and as one’s self. That exclusion, stated often and unapologetically in Cousin’s public rhetoric, was rather an independent policy choice. Stemming from the Doctrinaire vision of the class and gender hierarchies required in a fragile, post-Revolutionary society, it was subsequently overlaid on a psychological theory not especially well suited to support it. Another Doctrinaire desideratum—an unimpregnably unified and morally accountable self—did, to be sure, flow inexorably from Cousin’s spiritualist postulates. But criteria for human difference did not. Cousin, however, presented the exclusion of workers and women from selfhood as if it were a logically necessary corollary of his psychological theory. He then reinforced that exclusion by inserting training in psychology into a state system of lycées where attendance was restricted to the male bourgeoisie.

Among Cousin’s regiment, it was Amédée Jacques who, in the standard philosophy manual that he coauthored with two other Cousinian disciples in 1846, came closest to exposing the internal contradiction thinly papered over by the maître. As indicated in Chapter 5, Jacques argued for the “scrupulous” equality of the power of volition in everyone and furthermore insinuated that the individual appropriation of that power as the moi depended on a willed effort rather than on an act of (unequally distributed) intelligence. By implication, then, those who failed to take possession of the moi were not constrained in this regard by inbuilt impediments but had freely chosen to do so. Jacques advanced this argument in an unprovocative, indeed, semi-covert manner: he left aspects of his position fuzzy, did not label the position as a criticism of Cousin, and included it in an elementary textbook that explicitly declared its aloofness from controversy. But with the Revolution of 1848 and the establishment of the Second Republic, his posture gradually changed. Either he grasped for the first time the fundamental challenge to the Cousinian status quo contained in his own arguments or, more likely, he was emboldened by the political climate to proclaim as subversive what he had earlier presented as thoroughly innocuous.

Jacques had always been something of a fair-haired boy of the Cousinian regiment. Admitted to the Ecole normale supérieure in 1832,[^1] the young Parisian, the son of a painter of miniatures, passed the agrégation qualifying him to teach philosophy in the lycée in 1835 and the much more selective agrégation qualifying him to teach philosophy at the Sorbonne in 1843. At the time of that latter triumph, Cousin’s published account of the concours (which he proudly likened in intellectual quality to the philosophical disputations of the seventeenth century and Middle Ages!) indicated that, of the seven candidates, the two winners—Jacques and his classmate Emile Saisset—had consistently outshone the others. All the candidates, Cousin observed in passing, were doctrinally correct, a remark that would no doubt come back to haunt him.[^2] Failing a vacancy at the Sorbonne after the concours, Jacques was promoted from the lycée in Versailles to the prestigious Lycée Louis-le-Grand in Paris, where the inspectors noted the excellence of his pedagogy and his capacity to attract the brightest pupils to his classes.[^3]

Exactly what happened in 1847 and 1848 to derail the apparently conformist, prudent, and career-oriented Jacques can only be surmised from the various textual remains of his activities. In the waning days of the July Monarchy, as demands for the expansion of the suffrage intensified, Jacques founded a journal, La Liberté de penser, sympathetic to the left-wing opposition to the regime but without more precise political affiliation, leery of clerical intervention in the public sphere, and primarily concerned to ensure the free circulation of philosophical ideas.[^4]

After the February Revolution, the journal declared its democratic republicanism. At this stage, its attitude toward Cousinianism was quite benign, even moderately favorable. Jacques did not think that philosophy instruction should “belong to” anyone, “neither to Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Locke, Laromiguière, nor to Monsieur Cousin.” Nonetheless, he regarded as an unambiguous good the “stamp of spiritualism and elevation” that Cousin had placed on that instruction. He waxed eloquent about the “inviolability” of the “free personality.” He warned against charging religion exclusively with the task of inculcating morality. (“The obligatory teaching of moral philosophy in the institutions of secondary education must and can be one of the foundations of the moral unity of the society of the nineteenth century.”) He believed in the fundamentally mind-altering power of philosophy. (“We call on anyone who has attentively followed an officially sanctioned philosophy course. Has he not felt his intelligence created, so to speak, for a second time?”) Apart from denying Cousin ownership of academic philosophy, Jacques’ initial platform had only one plank to which the maître could object: a commitment to democracy—always Cousin’s nemesis—including an assertion that philosophy was its natural ally.[^5]

With the passage of the Falloux Law in March 1850, the Second Republic took a sharply conservative, pro-clerical turn. That law ended the monopoly of the Université, facilitated the creation of private, church-run schools, and gave the clergy a larger voice in the public secondary education administered by the state. At this juncture, the politics of La Liberté de penser became more strident and more risky, for the journal, always suspicious of Catholic influence, now found itself on the wrong side of the regime. In April Jules Simon, a future founder of the Third Republic and Jacques’ collaborator both on the Cousinian Manuel de philosophie and on the journal, cautiously quit the journal’s editorial board for political reasons.[^6] Continuing on his collision course with the regime, Jacques began to write and to publish in the journal a series of “Essays in Popular Philosophy.” The first two installments, which served as the introduction to the whole, were rabidly anticlerical, attempting, for example, to prove that the standard Catholic catechism, far from providing wholesome pedagogy for children, stupefied and ultimately corrupted them.[^7] In February and March 1851, the Council of Public Instruction, citing these two articles, removed Jacques from his teaching post at Louis-le-Grand and barred him from all future employment in the state educational system. The membership of the Council that delivered this harsh verdict included two archbishops, a bishop, and two priests; but, much more personally relevant to Jacques, it also included Victor Cousin and Adolphe Franck.[^8]

While it was Jacques’ anticlericalism that brought upon him the wrath of the state—a state that was nominally republican and democratic but was in fact headed for imminent conversion into a Bonapartist empire—it is another aspect of “The Essays on Popular Philosophy” that principally interests me here. In these essays Jacques finally carried to its logical conclusion the democratic critique of Cousin present in germ in the 1846 Manuel. He finally, in effect, deconstructed the wholly external bias against le peuple that Cousin had imposed on his psychology.

Jacques began this task in the second of the introductory essays—that is, in one of the pieces that Cousin read and sat in judgment on at the Council of Public Instruction. We must recall that the term “popular philosophy” had a decidedly Cousinian ring at this date. The maître had just written a pamphlet of that title in 1848, the first in a series of petits traités that the Academy of Moral and Political Sciences had sponsored after the June Days for the purpose of soothing the insurrectionary mood of the people (see Chapter 4). Cousin’s point had been that the popular classes had a native, intuitive philosophy, rather like the natural religion of Rousseau’s Savoyard vicar, that provided all they needed to know about morality, God, and the immortality of the soul; they did not require the specialized vocabulary and arcane techniques of academic philosophy. Without mentioning Cousin’s pamphlet, Jacques made precisely the opposite point early in 1851: the people needed to be taught philosophy because cultivated rationality was an indispensable accoutrement of freedom. Withholding such instruction, he implied, was an intentional strategy to keep the people in their place and to mark them as inferior. His “Essays” would thus draw up, on the basis of his “eighteen years . . . of practice of secondary instruction,” a formal philosophy curriculum geared to an audience of workers and peasants. It would not replicate the Cousinian curriculum neither because Cousinianism was too difficult for the popular classes nor intrinsically rotten—“one can take this word [eclecticism] in a good sense”—but because its own founder had, over time, corrupted it:

> I detest and I reject with all my force what the most illustrious representative of contemporary eclecticism has accumulated under that rubric. It has now come to signify . . . in politics the preference for expedients over principles, for fact over right; in everything, the study and the restitution of the past in place of the concern and preparation for the future. It signifies still worse: an impossible alliance between faith and reason—that is, an inexplicable compromise between slavery and freedom, a perpetual capitulation of conscience.[^9]

One indication of Cousin’s corruption of eclecticism was his exclusionary educational policy, his reservation of instruction in psychology to the social elite. On this subject, Jacques’ revulsion spilled over:

> The education of the young bourgeoisie is in fact a thankless job. The terrain where only the counsels of interest grow is worn-out, sterile, and arid. I know them, these children of the bourgeoisie: youth is on their faces but not in their hearts. . . . What they seek least of all is the beautiful and the true; they are impervious to the charm of letters and the enlightenment provided by the sciences. Their ambition focuses them wholly on obtaining a university degree, which will open for them what is conventionally called a career. . . .[^10]

According to Jacques, the content of Cousin’s own philosophy, if properly construed, undermined the policy that restricted training in it to the bourgeoisie. In the substantive installments of his “Essays,” Jacques reiterated, almost verbatim, the argument for the equality of wills he had inconspicuously tucked away in his 1846 Manuel. But now, by its presence in a philosophy course addressed to le peuple, that same argument took on the attributes of fiery political rhetoric. “The liberty to will,” wrote Jacques, “that is our true property. Only that do we absolutely possess; but that, at least, we possess entirely, without reserve, without limit.” Furthermore, he continued, “that liberty is equal in all men; only in that [dimension] are men scrupulously equal among themselves.” Wealth was the most unequally distributed of human resources; physical strength also varied considerably from one person to another, as did intelligence. “But all are equal by an equal liberty to will.” Finally, the equality of wills meant for Jacques the equal accessibility of selfhood to all. “The will, the free force that produces [our resolutions], is not only ours, it is us, and it alone is us. It is what we designate when we say ‘I’ or ‘me’ (moi).”[^11]

In these journal articles Jacques developed a model philosophy curriculum for the workingman, one that followed generally Cousinian lines with respect to substance but sharply diverged from Cousin’s arbitrary practice of excluding the larger part of humanity from the ranks of the selved. Had historical circumstances afforded him the opportunity to carry out his pedagogical program, he might have ended up cutting the tie between the Cousinian self and the bourgeois mode of being in the world. But Jacques’ program never advanced beyond the planning stage. Not only had he forfeited his hard-won academic credentials, but Louis-Napoleon’s successful coup d’état later in 1851 drove him into exile in South America; he died in Buenos Aires in 1865 at the age of fifty-two.[^12]

### A Female Cousinian-Style Self?

Jacques did for workingmen what Caroline Angebert had done for women: both laid bare not so much the injustice as the sheer logical inconsistency of Cousin’s denial of selfhood to an unprivileged group. But even if Jacques’ intervention came relatively late (Angebert began badgering Cousin before the Revolution of 1830) and was ultimately inefficacious, he at least made his case in a public forum. Angebert had confined hers to private correspondence with the maître, and in the end she requested instruction in philosophical psychology only for herself, not for women in general.

If a public vindication of the female capacity for Cousinian-style selfhood was ever going to occur, surely the opportune moment for it would be the founding of the national system of lycées for girls under the early Third Republic. Since the lycée class in philosophy had, by the 1880s, already been the locus of training in the moi for several generations of young Frenchmen, it is easy to imagine a republican educator speaking out on the importance of providing comparable training for their female counterparts. Even if these educators made no direct connection between academic philosophy and selfhood, they were certainly aware of the incomparable prestige that philosophy enjoyed in the secondary school curriculum and some, at least, must have been eager to see young women partake of its intellectual riches and even its cachet. But in fact, far from being spokesmen for female selfhood, or even for female training in philosophy, the educators of the early Third Republic took pains to keep the philosophy class out of the reach of their newly invented creature, the lycéenne.

The parliamentary commission that prepared the legislation on the new lycées excluded philosophy from the curriculum on the grounds that “all the philosophic knowledge usefully taught to girls is already included in moral instruction, in history, or in literary history.” From the rather telegraphic minutes of their proceedings, we can infer that they meant by this pronouncement, first, that girls simply had less practical use for “philosophic knowledge” because their future vocation lay in being “mothers and housewives” rather than savantes. But the commissioners gave a second meaning to the lack of “usefulness” of philosophy for girls, a meaning imbued with the anticlerical aims that shaped so many late nineteenth-century French government policies on women. At their private meeting, Paul Bert proposed that the curriculum for girls be headed by “moral instruction”; this abbreviated version of the traditional rubric “moral and religious instruction” would, he argued, “indicate from the outset the spirit informing this new education.” In response, Camille Sée urged that the term “philosophy” be included in the formula as well, but Bert—whose viewpoint eventually ruled the day—warned against the employment of a term that had already given rise to “so many objections.”[^13] If we attempt to decode this cryptic interchange, it appears that Bert believed that suppressing the phrase “religious instruction” would send to parents and clerics the entirely accurate message that the Third Republic, committed to laicization, intended to remove religious training from the state schools and relegate it to voluntary, extra-curricular settings. But he also apparently believed that replacing “religious instruction” with “philosophy” would be an excessive provocation. Because the clergy and its sympathizers had long alleged philosophy to be a subject matter corrosive of religious faith, such nomenclature would identify the new curriculum not merely as religiously neutral but as actively antireligious. The female lycées would thus certainly attract a barrage of clerical hostility.

In other words, lycéennes were to be deprived of a philosophy class in part because a prudent anticlerical politics dictated that the state accord a measure of respect to the long-standing bond between the Church and the female sex and that it not appear to be embarking upon the aggressive dechristianization of women. The conflation of the commissioners’ two meanings tempered the discriminatory nature of the policy: girls were to be taught only a smattering of philosophy not because they were intellectually incapable of absorbing more but because philosophy—and especially philosophy for girls—was a red flag to influential segments of the public. Bert and his colleagues have here presented a typical instance of early Third Republican reasoning on women’s questions, with anticlerical requirements entering the picture as a justification for antifeminist policy decisions. In much the same way, for example, many republicans later refused to support women’s suffrage, not because of any intrinsic deficiency of women but because the female vote would, they contended, vastly expand the political power of the clergy.[^14]

The decision to omit a full-fledged philosophy course from the new lycées translated in practice into a course in morals that began in the third year and met a mere hour a week; in the fifth and final year it was devoted to a consideration of “Elements of Psychology Applied to Education.” The applied rather than pure nature of this instruction was thought to suit young women because, by dint of the domestic authority they would one day wield, they were fated to be “always educator[s] in fact.” A pathetically watered down version of the psychology given pride of place in the Cousinian programme, this psychology course for girls contained a brief mention of “Voluntary activity: liberty and personality” under an unintentionally comic heading that included such other forms of “activity” as the “instinctive” and the “gymnastic.” There was no mention of the moi or of introspective technique.[^15]

Nor can the omission of the moi be regarded as accidental. More than a decade after the creation of the new curriculum, one philosopher-educator regarded as a champion of women felt obliged to state—it was apparently not obvious to his audience—that women were persons. “Whatever history, physiology, and psychology can teach us about the weaknesses and miseries of women,” said Henri Marion, “nothing will prevent her from being, in our eyes, a person (italics in the original)—that is, a being responsible in the same way a man is, having a destiny to fulfill freely.”[^16] Truncating the philosophy curriculum in the female lycées may have been a prudent way to navigate the treacherous political shoals of the early Third Republic. But we can only conclude that what, in particular, was removed faithfully reflected the fact that, in the discourse of the Université at the end of the nineteenth century, female selfhood was far from axiomatic. Throughout the nineteenth century the Cousinian-style moi thus preserved the exclusively masculine character that, according to prevailing stereotypes, suited its core definition as willed activity in the world.

### A Long-Lived Programme

As I have often noted in this book, the chief source of the broad cultural influence exerted by Cousinian psychology was its national institutionalization in the programme, or syllabus, of the lycée philosophy class. That institutionalization, which initially occurred in 1832, reflected Cousin’s explicit tailoring of his intellectual creation to the political needs of the July Monarchy. But what is most interesting, because perhaps most unexpected, was the persistence of the Cousinian programme long after the July Monarchy had passed from the scene.

Between its 1832 implantation and the end of the century, Cousinianism was in retreat for only a period of a dozen years at the beginning of the Second Empire. Soon after Louis-Napoléon’s coup d’état at the end of 1851, the lycée classe de philosophie, now officially labeled “sterile or dangerous,” was abolished outright and replaced with a far more restricted course in logic.[^17] In an era in which French elites had again embraced traditional religion as an instrument of social peace, the government clearly intended to rid secondary instruction of that heretically tinged, anthropocentric Cousinian psychology that had always irked the Church. But by the second decade of the Empire, when liberalization was the political watchword, this extreme, pro-clerical measure had outlived its usefulness. Immediately upon his appointment as minister of public education in 1863, and to “signal clearly the turn my administration was going to take,” Victor Duruy rescinded it in favor of a version of the old Cousinian philosophy course. He had been appalled, while inspector-general of the Université some years earlier, to witness the degradation of philosophy at the hands of the clerical reaction; attending the logic class at a provincial lycée, for example, he found the professor “tiring his pupils and himself by presenting the forty or fifty forms of the syllogism that medieval scholars had enjoyed studying in order to avoid thinking about more serious things.” Duruy construed lycée instruction in philosophy—full-fledged philosophy, not its reduced form as logic—in the same elitist terms as Cousin. Because France was, he opined, the “true moral center of the world,” and because it had been under a regime of universal suffrage since 1848, it needed an “aristocracy of intelligence” specifically fortified by philosophy to serve as a “legitimate counterweight to a boundless democracy.”[^18]

The early Third Republic programmes of 1874, 1880, and 1902, the last of which continued in force until 1925, all retained what is for our purposes the essential Cousinian innovation: the commencement of philosophy education by the study of psychology, a subject matter which included, in some form or other, the tenet of the unity of the self. To be sure, these successive programmes diverged in certain respects from the Cousinian template. The one of 1874, promulgated when the nominal Republic sought to enforce a conservative “moral order,” substituted the old-fashioned term âme for that of moi; it insisted on the unity of the faculties of the âme as constitutive of the “human personality.” The one for 1880 placed the moi under the rubric of intellectual rather than volitional activity and included the study of mental phenomena outside the purview of ordinary consciousness: sleep, dreams, somnambulism, hallucination, madness. The one for 1902 referred to such extraconscious mental events more laconically under the rubric “psychological automatism” and then accentuated “the personality, the idea of the moi” by listing it as the conclusion of the entire section on psychology.[^19]

Even the 1925 programme, the first curricular innovation in more than two decades and one that might have reflected the profound dislocations of the First World War, represented no fundamental overhaul of the entrenched pedagogy. As one textbook writer observed, it differed from its predecessor “only in appearance and especially in the order of the questions. . . .”[^20] That Cousinianism continued to be a live reference point, even if no longer an orthodoxy, can be seen in this question from the 1929 baccalaureate examination in philosophy: “The school of Victor Cousin held that psychological consciousness is infallible. What do you think of such a postulate?”[^21]

From a historical perspective, the staying power of Cousinianism had been put to a particularly stringent test in the 1880 programme, to which fell the assignment of harmonizing the lycée curriculum with the ideals of the newly republicanized Republic. Given the positivist bent of that Republic, and given the traditional role of the Cousinian moi as a jumping off point to metaphysics, one might have reasonably expected the moi to disappear from the curriculum at this date. Yet, while absent from the syllabus of the new female lycées, it maintained its old centrality in the training of young men. Some contemporary commentators alleged that it had undergone an important, if subtle, epistemological mutation. Because the scientific wisdom of the latter nineteenth century prescribed that psychology be freed from its earlier metaphysical trappings, “[t]he idea of the moi, the idea of the external world, and the idea of God are no longer [in the new curriculum] laid down a priori, but are set forth simply as the products of intellectual activity. One will no longer be spared the task of seeking to explain, if one can, how these ideas are formed, modified, corrected.”[^22] Others, however, persuasively argued that the new programme represented continuity far more than change, and they adduced in support of this assertion that its chief author was none other than Paul Janet, “former secretary of Monsieur Cousin, very attached to the traditions of the [Cousinian] spiritualist school though . . . open to new ideas.”[^23] (We first encountered Paul Janet in Chapter 5 when, still a student member of Cousin’s regiment, he was given to angry outbursts against the maître. By the time of the republicanization of the early Third Republic some thirty-five years later, he held one of the three philosophy chairs at the Sorbonne, presided over the jury that certified candidates for university posts in philosophy, and had attained the status of representative par excellence of a still surviving Cousinianism.)[^24]

This debate over the precise significance of the 1880 reforms is not of great moment for the thesis I am setting forth here. Even if the moi presented to lycéens in the late nineteenth century required some active fashioning on the part of its possessor and hence was no longer as fully anchored in the nature of things as its pure Cousinian precursor had been, the critical fact for our purposes is that all lycéens were still receiving serious instruction in the moi and that the moi was still being depicted as one of the components of a tripartite (Cousinian) universe divided among mankind, God, and the external world. A glance at a philosophy manual geared to the 1880 programme finds the key Cousinian concepts very much intact, if clothed in slightly altered vocabulary. “Activity is thus the master faculty of the human mind.” Or, under a heading proclaiming the object of consciousness as “knowledge of the moi”: “The consciousness that we have of our energy—one, indivisible, and distinct—will allow us to refute materialism. . . .”[^25]

How can we account for the stunning longevity of Cousinianism? Surely bureaucratic inertia—the continuity of personnel in the state educational administration, which had been amply stocked with Cousin’s disciples during the heyday of the maître—provides a partial explanation. But given that the programme was periodically revised, and that proposed changes often provoked bitter and tumultuous quarrels, its fundamentally Cousinian shape could not have endured without a broad cultural consensus in its favor. The consensus may have been largely negative, a tacit agreement that Cousinianism was the best available option under the circumstances, the least of evils. As John Brooks has argued, the capaciousness of late nineteenth-century Cousinianism gave it “an important advantage over its more exclusive opponents, particularly Catholicism and positivism. However much these two schools disliked eclecticism, they disliked each other more.”[^26] But it seems clear that republicans placed a positive value on the basic contours of Cousinianism as well. Even in the 1890s and beyond, an era in which social solidarity began to be held up as a dominant republican value, the official culture needed to police the boundaries of that solidarity to prevent its sliding over into socialism.[^27] What better protection than to reaffirm institutionally a key element of garden-variety bourgeois belief: the free, unified, and morally accountable self?

### Rethinking the Discovery of the Unconscious

We are now in a position to revisit the quotation from Sartre that figured in the Introduction and that serves as the epigraph to this Epilogue. In that passage and the surrounding text, Sartre describes himself as astounded and repelled by his first encounter with the Freudian theory of the unconscious, which (extrapolating from his 1905 birth date) occurred in the early 1920s. A mind characterized by fault lines, fissures, and repressed contents was, he tells us, unthinkable to him as brilliant young product of the French lycée education of that era.

From the vantage point of this book, Sartre’s reaction is doubly noteworthy. First, Sartre offers himself as additional evidence of the fundamentally Cousinian shape that the lycée philosophy curriculum maintained well into the twentieth century. Although, as we have seen, material on sleep, dreams, somnambulism, hallucination, and madness—the very stuff from which anti-Cousinian psychologists constructed the concepts of multiple personalities and unconscious mental processes[^28]—had been added to the programme as early as 1880, the idea of a unified self still dominated the French philosophy classroom. If mental unity was the unambiguous message the seventeen-year-old Sartre took away from his philosophical studies a few years after the end of the First World War, we can safely assume that his less gifted classmates likewise failed to perceive the threat to the Cartesian-Cousinian moi contained in the supplementary material on altered states of consciousness. Even for Sartre, a sustained reading of a Freudian text for its own sake was required to bring that subversive point home.[^29]

Nor is it difficult to see how philosophy instruction managed to neutralize, almost trivialize such material in the service of the old doctrine of the unified moi. From 1880 on, philosophy textbooks propounded the doctrine that such a moi was not simply given a priori, as Cousin and his school had insisted. It was instead a psychological accomplishment, the result of a conscious mental process that the 1902 programme called synthèse. Such mental synthesis, resulting in the possession of a whole and unified moi, was the normal human condition; the domination of the psyche by unconscious modalities, and hence its fragmentation, was pathological. Consciousness was, in the standard vocabulary of the philosophy curriculum, a “superior” mental power, unconsciousness (or psychological automatism) an “inferior” one.[^30] In light of this carefully crafted doctrine, even a Sartre could emerge from the lycée in the 1920s with no inkling that the Cartesian cogito, or its successor the Cousinian moi, was under siege. As a philosophy textbook published in 1929 confidently proclaimed: “The personality is the most perfect form of unity.”[^31]

Second, the history that I have recounted in this book was obviously unknown to Sartre. He rehearsed what has become the canonical modernist narrative of the fin-de-siècle discovery of the unconscious: that the theories of Freud and of Frenchmen like Henri Bergson, Gustave LeBon, and Pierre Janet came as a breathtaking bolt from the blue, unheralded and unprecedented, threatening the apparently eternal verity (elegantly theorized by Descartes) of a whole and unified self.

But from the perspective of the protracted contest of psychologies I have described here, the so-called discovery that occurred at the end of the nineteenth century takes on a very different aspect. Situating it in a longue durée—one that begins as far back as the reception of Locke’s Essay on Human Understanding—considerably lessens its shock value. The fragmentation of the self appears as a more ordinary condition. Even if, to use the terminology I developed in the Introduction, the horizontal fragmentation exemplified by sensationalism and phrenology differs qualitatively from the vertical fragmentation exemplified by Freudianism and other theories of the unconscious, both types of fragmentation concur in producing perilously decentered selves: ones lacking, in the eyes of their critics, a firm unitary center that can make decisions, galvanize the whole to action, and take responsibility for that action. Within this longue durée Cousinianism appears as an extended and studious effort to ward off, in the name of bourgeois social order, the forces for psychic fragmentation inherent in biologistic modes of reasoning about mental life. The nineteenth-century unitary self appears perennially beleaguered. Vertical fragmentation appears as a latter-day variation on the theme of horizontal fragmentation.

From this defamiliarizing perspective, the question for the historian becomes not so much why the self shattered at the fin-de-siècle (pointing the way to even more radical, structuralist and post-structuralist claims about the death of the subject) as why the unitary self became so tenaciously implanted during the nineteenth century that even the young Sartre could mistake it for a given, a fact of life. This book has suggested an answer to that question.

### NOTES

The epigraph is from Jean-Paul Sartre, “An Interview,” New York Review of Books, 26 May 1970, p 23.

[^1]: 1. See AN: F17 4180, unpaginated brochure entitled “Etat des candidats présentés par les recteurs pour le concours de l’Ecole normale en 1832.”

[^2]: 2. Rapport de M. Cousin suivi des dissertations de MM. Emile Saisset et Amédée Jacques (Paris: Paul Dupont, 1843), pp. 5–6.

[^3]: 3. See AN: F17 7647, Dossier: Lycée Louis-le-Grand, “Observations générales sur l’enseignement de la philosophie,” 24 March 1850. The comments on Jacques were elicited by the complaints of his fellow philosophy professor, the aging Idéologue Valette, that Jacques was stealing his students.

[^4]: 4. See Amédée Jacques, “La liberté de penser,” La Liberté de penser 1 (December 1847–May 1848): 1–6.

[^5]: 5. A. Jacques, “De l’enseignement de la philosophie dans les lycées nationaux,” ibid. 1: 493–96.

[^6]: 6. See the notice in ibid. 5 (December 1849–May 1850): 633.

[^7]: 7. Amédée Jacques, “Essais de philosophie populaire, I: Exposé des motifs,” ibid. 7 (December 1850–March 1851): 1–21, esp. 8, and “Suite de l’exposé des motifs,” ibid., pp. 171–87.

[^8]: 8. AN F17*1864, Conseil supérieur de l’instruction publique. Assemblée générale, Registre unique, 13 August 1850–14 August 1851, meetings of 24 February 1851 and 14 March 1851. For an account of the proceedings by a supporter of Jacques, see H. Bellouard, “Avant-Propos,” in Amédée Jacques, Le christianisme et la démocratie (Paris: Au bureau de la Liberté de penser, 1851), pp. 5–18.

[^9]: 9. A. Jacques, “Essais de philosophie populaire: Suite et fin de l’exposé des motifs,” Liberté de penser 7: 171–87, esp. 183.

[^10]: 10. Ibid., 181–82.

[^11]: 11. A. Jacques, “Essais de philosophie populaire. De l’Homme 3: Le libre-arbitre, l’âme,” ibid. 8 (June–November 1851): 340–53, quotations on 347, 352.

[^12]: 12. For these biographical details, see article “Jacques (Amédée Florent)” in Pierre Larousse, Grand dictionnaire universelle du XIXe siècle (Paris, 1866–79, reprint, Paris: Slatkine, 1982).

[^13]: 13. Minutes of the Commission relative à l’enseignement secondaire des jeunes filles, AN C3279, dossier 1379 (a small unpaginated notebook), meeting of 19 February [1879]. I learned of this source in Françoise Mayeur, L’enseignement secondaire des jeunes filles sous la Troisième République (Paris: Presses de la Fondation nationale des sciences politiques, 1977).

[^14]: 14. See Steven C. Hause with Anne R. Kenney, Women’s Suffrage and Social Politics in the French Third Republic (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984), pp. 13–14, 16, 60.

[^15]: 15. For the text of this 1882 programme, see Camille Sée, ed., Lycées et collèges de jeunes filles: Documents, rapports et discours (Paris: L. Cerf, 1884), pp. 488–89. On the justification for applied psychology, see Henri Marion, L’education des jeunes filles (Paris: A. Colin, 1902), p. 358.

[^16]: 16. Henri Marion, Psychologie de la femme (Paris: Armand Colin, 1900), pp. 14–15.

[^17]: 17. “Nouveau plan d’études pour les lycées et les Facultés,” 10 April 1852, Bulletin administratif d’instruction publique, no. 28 (April 1852), pp. 53–63, quotation on 53; and “Classe de logique,” ibid., no. 32 (August 1852), p. 139.

[^18]: 18. For the quotations, see Victor Duruy, Notes et souvenirs (1811–1894), 2 vols. (Paris: Hachette, 1901), 1: 198–99, 279. On the general point, see Stéphane Douailler, Christiane Mauve, Georges Navet, Jean-Claude Pompougnac, and Patrice Vermeren, eds., La philosophie saisie par l’Etat: Petits écrits sur l’enseignement philosophique en France, 1789–1900 (Paris: Aubier, 1988), introduction to Chapter 4, p. 444.

[^19]: 19. See Bulletin administratif du Ministère de l’Instruction publique, n.s. 17 (1874): 490–91; n.s. 23 (1880) 960–61; n.s. 71 (1902): 760–61.

[^20]: 20. Pierre Janet, Manuel du baccalauréat (Seconde Partie) (Série Mathématiques) Philosophie, 8th ed. (Paris: Vuibert, 1929), p. vii.

[^21]: 21. A. Cuvillier, La dissertation de philosophie au baccalauréat (Paris: Armand Colin, 1933), pp. 9–10. This text, a study guide for students preparing for the all-important examination, contains sample questions from previous years and, in some cases, answers as well.

[^22]: 22. Henri Marion, “Le nouveau programme de philosophie,” Revue philosophique 10 (1880); 414–28, esp. 422–23, 423 for the quotation.

[^23]: 23. Emile Beaussire, “L’enseignement de la philosophie avant les nouveaux programmes,” Revue internationale de l’enseignement 3 (January–June 1882): 59–65, quotation on 65.

[^24]: 24. See Jean-Louis Fabiani, Les philosophes de la république (Paris: Minuit, 1988), pp. 32–33, 60.

[^25]: 25. Henri Joly, Cours de philosophie, répondant au nouveau programme officiel des lycées et du baccalauréat, 6th ed. (Paris: Delalain, 1881), pp. 15, 30, 35–36.

[^26]: 26. John I. Brooks III, The Eclectic Legacy: Academic Philosophy and the Human Sciences in Nineteenth-Century France (Newark: University of Delaware Press, 1998), p. 55. For an account of a dispute over the philosophy programme in the 1890s, see Daniela S. Barberis, “Moral Education for the Elite of Democracy: the Classe de Philosophie Between Sociology and Philosophy,” Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 38 (2002): 355–69.

[^27]: 27. See J. E. S. Hayward, “The Official Social Philosophy of the French Third Republic: Léon Bourgeois and Solidarism,” International Review of Social History 6 (1961): 19–48, and Janet R. Horne, A Social Laboratory for Modern France: The Musée Social and the Rise of the Welfare State (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002), pp. 118–20.

[^28]: 28. For a fully developed version of this argument, see Jan Goldstein, “The Advent of Psychological Modernism in France: An Alternate Narrative,” in Modernist Impulses in the Human Sciences, 1870–1930, ed. Dorothy Ross (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994), pp. 190–209.

[^29]: 29. My examination of the relevant editions of Janet’s Manuel—the textbook that Sartre probably used—suggests that Sartre did not encounter even cursory references to Freud in his philosophy class. Freud seems to have entered the philosophy curriculum of the French lycée only with Armand Cuvillier’s textbook, Manuel de philosophie, 2 vols. (Paris: A. Colin, 1931), whose first volume, “Psychology,” contained a brief discussion of the Freudian theory of repression (pp. 158–59). My thanks to Emmanuelle Saada for bringing Cuvillier to my attention.

[^30]: 30. For an example of this pedagogical discourse, rooted in Pierre Janet’s 1889 philosophy dissertation, L’ Automatisme psychologique, see Pierre Janet, Manuel du baccalauréat de l’enseignement secondaire (Classes de Philosophie A & B), Philosophie, 3d ed. (Paris: Vuibert et Nony, 1905), pp. 173–74, 178–79, 181. Janet had revised this edition of his textbook “in such a way as to put it in complete conformity with the new programme of the philosophy class”; “Avertissment,” n.p., dated September 1904.

[^31]: 31. Pierre Janet, Manuel du baccalaureat (Seconde Partie) (Série Mathémathiques) Philosophie, p. 111.
